**CHAPTER 69A-47**

**UNIFORM FIRE SAFETY STANDARDS FOR ELEVATORS**

69A-47.011	Standards Adopted

69A-47.012	Uniform Elevator Keys

69A-47.013	Regional Access (Repealed)

69A-47.014	Compliance Dates (Repealed)

69A-47.015	Requirements for Elevator Keys

69A-47.016	Access to Elevator Keys

69A-47.017	Duplication of Elevator Keys Prohibited

69A-47.018	Obtaining Elevator Keys

69A-47.019	Lockboxes

**69A-47.011 Standards Adopted.**

(1) The following shall be in compliance with the Florida Fire Prevention Code, 2010 Edition, as adopted in rule 69A-3.012, F.A.C., “Standards of the National Fire Protection Association and Other Standards Adopted,” and those standards adopted in rule 61C-5.001, F.A.C., “Safety Standards,” (8-21-12):

(a) Enclosures of elevator hoistways, machine rooms, and machine spaces;

(b) Automatic smoke detectors and heat detectors; and,

(c) Automatic sprinklers in hydraulic and non-hydraulic elevators.

(2) Rule 61C-5.001, F.A.C., “Safety Standards,”(8-21-12), may be obtained by writing to the Department of Financial Services, Division of State Fire Marshal, Bureau of Fire Prevention, 200 East Gaines Street, Tallahassee, Florida 32399-0342.

*Rulemaking Authority 633.104 FS. Law Implemented 633.104, 633.206 FS. History–New 8-16-01, Formerly 4A-47.011, Amended 11-6-13.*

**69A-47.012 Uniform Elevator Keys.** 

(1) As used in rules 69A-47.012 through 69A-47.019, F.A.C., “these rules” refers to rules 69A-47.012 through 69A-47.019, F.A.C.

(2) Each lock for all elevators in each region of the seven emergency response regions in this state that permits public access must be keyed for one master elevator key as required in these rules, unless an alternative as authorized by rule 69A-47.019, F.A.C., has been implemented.

(3) The purpose of these rules is to implement section 399.15, F.S., to allow all elevators within each of the seven state emergency response regions to be operated by firefighters in a fire emergency.

*Rulemaking Authority 399.15 FS. Law Implemented 399.15 FS. History–New 6-6-06, Amended 1-19-11.*

**69A-47.013** **Regional Access.**

*Rulemaking Authority 399.15 FS. Law Implemented 399.15 FS. History–New 6-6-06, Amended 3-28-10, Repealed 2-1-15.*

**69A-47.014** **Compliance Dates.**

*Rulemaking Authority 399.15 FS. Law Implemented 399.15 FS. History–New 6-6-06, Amended 3-28-10, Repealed 2-1-15.*

**69A-47.015 Requirements for Elevator Keys.**

(1) All elevator keys within each of the seven emergency response regions as set forth in these rules shall be uniform and specific for that region.

(2) The following are the designated emergency response regions, with the description of the elevator key assigned to each region:

(a) Emergency Response Region 1: Escambia, Santa Rosa, Okaloosa, Walton, Holmes, Jackson, Washington, Bay, Gulf, Calhoun: Yale Key No. R-80833-2006-1;

(b) Emergency Response Region 2: Gadsden, Liberty, Leon, Franklin, Wakulla, Taylor, Jefferson, Madison, Lafayette, Hamilton, Suwannee, Columbia, Dixie: Yale Key No. R-80833-2006-2;

(c) Emergency Response Region 3: Nassau, Duval, Clay, St. Johns, Flagler, Putnam, Bradford, Union, Baker, Levy, Alachua, Gilchrist: Yale Key No. R-80833-2006-3;

(d) Emergency Response Region 4: Citrus, Hernando, Pasco, Pinellas, Hillsborough, Polk, Manatee: Yale Key No. R-80833-2006-4;

(e) Emergency Response Region 5: Marion, Sumter, Lake, Orange, Seminole, Osceola, Brevard, Volusia: Yale Key No. R-80833-2006-5;

(f) Emergency Response Region 6: Hardee, Sarasota, Desoto, Charlotte, Glades, Highland, Okeechobee, Hendry, Lee, Collier: Yale Key No. R-80833-2006-6;

(g) Emergency Response Region 7: Monroe, Miami-Dade, Broward, Palm Beach, Martin, St. Lucie, Indian River: Yale Key No. R-80833-2006-7.

*Rulemaking Authority 399.15 FS. Law Implemented 399.15 FS. History–New 6-6-06.*

**69A-47.016 Access to Elevator Keys.** 

(1) Uniform elevator keys shall be made available only to:

(a) Elevator owners or their authorized agents;

(b) Elevator contractors licensed by the State of Florida;

(c) Florida state certified inspectors;

(d) State agency representatives authorized by the Department of Financial Services, Division of State Fire Marshal, Bureau of Fire Prevention, or the Department of Business and Professional Regulation, Division of Hotels and Restaurants, Bureau of Elevator Safety; and,

(e) A representative of a local fire department authorized to possess a key by the fire department chief or other chief administrative officer of any fire department or department of public safety.

(2) Access to elevator keys shall be in compliance with section 399.15(3), F.S.

(3) Information pertaining to obtaining elevator keys is available by writing to the Division of State Fire Marshal at 200 East Gaines Street, Tallahassee, Florida 32399-0342, or it may also be obtained by visiting the Division of State Fire Marshal website located at http://www.myfloridacfo.com/Division/SFM/BFP/UniformElevatorKeys.htm.

*Rulemaking Authority 399.15 FS. Law Implemented 399.15 FS. History–New 6-6-06, Amended 2-1-15.*

**69A-47.017 Duplication of Elevator Keys Prohibited.** 

The prohibition on duplication of elevator keys shall be in compliance with Section 399.15(3), F.S.

*Rulemaking Authority 399.15 FS. Law Implemented 399.15 FS. History–New 6-6-06, Amended 2-1-15.*

**69A-47.018 Obtaining Elevator Keys.**

(1) Any person authorized under this rule chapter to possess a uniform elevator key shall apply to an authorized vendor selected by the Division of State Fire Marshal on form DFS-K3-1660, “Application for Uniform Elevator Key Florida Department of Financial Services Division of State Fire Marshal,” for the issuance of such key. Form DFS-K3-1660, “Application for Uniform Elevator Key Florida Department of Financial Services Division of State Fire Marshal,” Rev. 10/05, is adopted and incorporated herein by reference and may be obtained by writing to the Department of Financial Services, Division of State Fire Marshal, Bureau of Fire Prevention, 200 East Gaines Street, Tallahassee, Florida 32399-0342, and/or by visiting the Division of State Fire Marshal website located at http://www.fldfs.com/SFM/index.htm.

(2) Upon the applicant’s presentation of a fully completed and executed copy of form DFS-K3-1660 to an authorized vendor, the applicant may obtain a key or keys from such vendor.

(3) The issuing vendor must maintain a copy of each form DFS-K3-1660 following the issuance of each key or keys. This form may be maintained in its original form or in an electronic format.

(4) Copies of executed form DFS-K3-1660 shall be provided to the State Fire Marshal or the local fire official upon receipt of a written request. Such request may be in the form of electronic mail.

(5) The name, address, and additional contact information for each authorized vendor shall be available by writing to the Department of Financial Services, Division of State Fire Marshal, Bureau of Fire Prevention, 200 East Gaines Street, Tallahassee, Florida 32399-0342, and shall be posted on the Division of State Fire Marshal website located at http://www.fldfs.com/SFM/index.htm.

*Rulemaking Authority 399.15 FS. Law Implemented 399.15 FS. History–New 6-6-06.*

**69A-47.019 Lockboxes.**

(1) As an alternative to compliance with rule 69A-47.012, F.A.C., a building owner may provide for the installation of a keyed lock box that accepts the uniform key for that specific region. The lock box shall be installed in accordance with** this section.

(2) Alternative installation of Lock Boxes.

(a) The lock box shall be installed flush or recessed mounted.

(b) The lock box’s front cover shall be hinged on the right side and shall be engraved or painted with the words “Fire Department Use Only – Elevator keys.”

(c)** The lock box shall be mounted at each elevator bank at the lobby nearest to the lowest level of fire department access.

(d)** Only keys used for the operation of the elevator or an elevator component shall be placed inside the lock box.

(3)(a)** In buildings subject to these alternative lock box provisions which house two or more different elevator banks, a single lock box may be used when such banks are separated by not more than 30 feet.

(b) In the buildings specified in paragraph (3)(a), with elevators or elevator banks separated by more than 30 feet, separate lock boxes must be used for each elevator or elevator bank so separated.

*Rulemaking Authority 399.15 FS. Law Implemented 399.15 FS. History–New 6-6-06, Amended 1-19-11.*
