**CHAPTER 69A-62**

**FIREFIGHTER EMPLOYMENT STANDARDS**

69A-62.0001	Definitions

69A-62.001	Uniform Minimum Firefighter Employment Standards; Adoption of OSHA Standards

69A-62.002	Uniform Minimum Firefighter Employment Standards; Adoption of National Fire Protection Association Standards

69A-62.003	Requirements Applicable to Fire Scenes

69A-62.004	Uniform Minimum Firefighter Employment Standards: Presence of Toxic Substances

69A-62.005	Exemption from 29 Code of Federal Regulations, Section 1910.134(g)(4) (Repealed)

69A-62.006	Requirements for Recognition as a Fire Department (Repealed)

69A-62.007	Minimum Requirements for Class 9 Protection (Repealed)

69A-62.020	Definitions

69A-62.021	Minimum Requirements for a Firefighter Employer Comprehensive Safety and Health Program

69A-62.022	Firefighter Employer Safety and Health Compliance Plan

69A-62.023	Criteria for Identifying Firefighter Employers with a High Frequency or Severity of Injuries

69A-62.024	Standards for Construction, Repair, and Maintenance of Firefighter Employee Places of Employment and the Inspection, Testing and Maintenance of Fire Apparatus

69A-62.025	Employer Cancer Prevention Best Practices

69A-62.030	Definitions

69A-62.031	Right of Entry

69A-62.032	Division Inspection or Investigation

69A-62.033	Recordkeeping Responsibilities of Firefighter Employers

69A-62.034	Notice of Violation

69A-62.035	Safety Training

69A-62.036	Procedures Relating to Penalties

69A-62.040	Definitions

69A-62.041	Scope

69A-62.042	Firefighter Employer Requirements

69A-62.043	Duties and Functions of the Safety Committee and Workplace Safety Coordinator

69A-62.044	Firefighter Employer Evaluation by the Division

69A-62.045	Penalties

69A-62.050	Official State Firefighter Memorial Flag

**69A-62.0001 Definitions.** 

Unless the text or context clearly requires otherwise, the definitions in Section 633.504, F.S., are applicable to this rule chapter. In addition, for purposes of this rule chapter, the following definitions apply.

(1) “Act” means Sections 633.502 through 633.536, F.S.

(2) “Division” means the Division of State Fire Marshal of the Department of Financial Services of the State of Florida.

(3) “Exclusionary” zone or “hot” zone means the area immediately around the incident where serious threat of harm exists, which includes the collapse zone for a structure fire. Entry into such zone would require the use of breathing apparatus, protective clothing, and specialized training required under Section 633.508(2), F.S., and this rule chapter.

(4) “Fire department” means any local fire department or fire district in the state responsible for municipal or county fire protection as recognized by the appropriate municipal or county government or the state. A fire department has the intent and purpose of carrying out the duties, functions, powers, and responsibilities normally associated with a fire department. These duties, functions, powers, and responsibilities include but are not limited to the protection and saving of life and property against fire, explosions, and other hazards, the prevention and extinguishment of fires, and the enforcement of municipal, county, and state fire prevention codes, as well as of any law pertaining to the prevention and control of fires and hazardous materials incident mitigation.

(5) “Firefighter employee” means a firefighter employee as defined in Section 633.504, F.S.

(6) “IDLH” or “IDLH atmosphere” means an atmosphere which is immediately dangerous to life and health.

(7) “Trained commensurate to duty” means that the person must have documented training in the specific task assigned or combination of skills required to accomplish any series of tasks which may be assigned to that individual given a set of conditions or circumstances which that individual may undertake. Anticipated special circumstances such as hazardous materials operations, technical rescue, and similar conditions or circumstances require additional training.

(8) “Two-in, two-out rule” or “two-in, two-out” means and refers to 29 C.F.R. 1910.134(g)(4), Including Notes One and Two, as modified by Section 633.508(3), F.S.

*Rulemaking Authority 633.104(1), 633.128(1)(a), 633.508 FS. Law Implemented 633.128(1)(a), 633.504, 633.508 FS. History–New 9-6-04, Amended 12-12-17.*

**69A-62.001 Uniform Minimum Firefighter Employment Standards; Adoption of OSHA Standards.**

(1) The Division adopts and incorporates as rules the following standards as they pertain solely to firefighter employees and firefighter employers: sections 1910.120(q), 1910.134 as modified by Section 633.508(3), F.S., and 1910.146, of Part 1910 of the Occupational Safety and Health Standards, 29 Code of Federal Regulations, effective April 8, 1998.

(2) A copy of all standards adopted and incorporated by reference in this rule may be obtained at www.osha.gov.

*Rulemaking Authority 633.104(1), 633.508 FS. Law Implemented 633.128(1)(a), 633.506, 633.508 FS. History–New 11-21-01, Formerly 4A-62.001, Amended 2-6-13.*

**69A-62.002** **Uniform Minimum Firefighter Employment Standards; Adoption of National Fire Protection Association Standards.**

(1) The Department of Financial Services, Division of State Fire Marshal, adopts and incorporates as rules of the Division of State Fire Marshal the following standards as they pertain solely to firefighters and firefighter employers: The National Fire Protection Association, Inc., Standard 1500, Paragraph 7.15 (Personal Alert Safety System [PASS]), 2007 edition. A PASS device shall be worn each time a Self-Contained Breathing Apparatus is required.

(2) The standards published by the National Fire Protection Association adopted and incorporated in this rule chapter by reference may be purchased from the NFPA at: 1 Batterymarch Park, Quincy, Massachusetts 02169-7471, or viewed on-line at www.NFPA.org.

*Rulemaking Authority 633.104(1), 633.128(1)(a), 633.508 FS. Law Implemented 633.128(1)(a), 633.508 FS. History–New 11-21-01, Formerly 4A-62.002, Amended 1-1-09, 5-22-11.*

**69A-62.003** **Requirements Applicable to Fire Scenes.**

(1) Except as provided in paragraph (a) or (b), a firefighter employee or any other person under the authority of the firefighter employer at the scene of a fire may not participate in any operation involving two-in, two-out as one of the two or more persons inside the Immediate Danger to Life and Health (IDLH) atmosphere or as one of the two or more persons outside of the IDLH atmosphere unless such firefighter or other person at the scene of a fire has successfully completed the training curriculum and examination requirements set forth in paragraph 69A-37.055(2)(a), F.A.C. 

(a) United States Department of Defense firefighters responding in their capacity as U.S. Department of Defense firefighters meeting equivalent U.S. Department of Defense qualifications are exempt from the requirement in subsection (1).

(b) Volunteer firefighters having National Wildfire Coordinating Group (NWCG) S-130, S-190, and Standards for Survival certification by the Florida Division of Forestry may participate in wild land fire suppression without meeting the requirement of subsection (1).

(2) It is each Firefighter Employer’s responsibility to be familiar with the training standards of commonly used mutual aid agreements, automatic aid agreements, and other similar resources with other entities with whom the Firefighter Employer has an agreement. Each fire department responding pursuant to a mutual aid agreement or automatic aid agreement or similar document is responsible for the training and certification of its own personnel. Unless otherwise specified, responses to requests for assistance shall be with personnel meeting the training requirements in subsection (1).

(3) A firefighter employee and any other person under the authority of the firefighter employer who has not met the training requirements in subsection (1), may engage in assigned support services outside of the hot zone.

*Rulemaking Authority 633.104(1), 633.508 FS. Law Implemented 633.128(1)(a), 633.506, 633.508 FS. History–New 11-21-01, Formerly 4A-62.003, Amended 9-6-04, 1-1-09, 2-6-13.*

**69A-62.004** **Uniform Minimum Firefighter Employment Standards; Presence of Toxic Substances.**

(1) A firefighter employer shall maintain in the firefighter place of employment:

(a) A list of work areas, identified by name and location, where toxic substances, as defined in subsection (3) and not exempted by subsection (4), below, are present, and the chemical and common name of each toxic substance present; and,

(b) A material safety data sheet for each toxic substance listed above.

(2) Whenever there is a change in the work areas where toxic substances are stored, or the addition of toxic substances in the firefighter place of employment, the firefighter employer shall update the information provided pursuant to subsection (1).

(3) Since not all substances are hazardous in every form to which a firefighter employee may be exposed, these rules apply when the following conditions are present:

(a) The substance is manufactured, produced, used, applied, or stored in the workplace; and,

(b) The substance is known to cause damage to living tissue, impairment of the central nervous system, severe illness, or, in extreme cases, death, when ingested, inhaled or absorbed by the skin, during customary or reasonably foreseeable handling or use.

(4) A substance or mixture which satisfies the criteria in subsection (3) is exempt from coverage if the substance:

(a) Is toxic only if chronically ingested;

(b) Is an alcoholic beverage as defined in the Beverage Law;

(c) Is toxic but labeled pursuant to the Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act, as amended; and the Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act, as amended;

(d) Is a consumer product;

(e) Is a commercial product which is substantially equivalent in formulation to similar consumer products used for the same general purpose, when used in the workplace in such a manner that firefighter employee exposure is not significantly greater than exposures resulting from the principal consumer use of the similar consumer product;

(f) Is food stuff;

(g) Is fossil fuel in fuel tanks, engines, and other operating systems of vehicles where the substances are present only in amounts and forms substantially equivalent to the amounts and forms generally available to consumers; and,

(h) Is fossil fuel used for heating, or power generation purposes, such that firefighter employees are not exposed to fumes or combustion by-products.

(5) Every firefighter employer who uses, applies, or stores toxic substances, as described in subsection (3) and not exempted in subsection (4), in the workplace shall post a notice in a place where notices are normally posted, informing firefighter employees of their rights under the law. Such posters may be obtained upon request from the State Fire Marshal.

*Rulemaking Authority 633.104(1) FS. Law Implemented 633.128(1)(a), 633.520, 633.508 FS. History–New 11-21-01, Formerly 4A-62.004, Amended 6-7-10.*

**69A-62.005 Exemption from 29 Code of Federal Regulations, Section 1910.134(g)(4).**

*Rulemaking Authority 633.104, 633.508(2) FS. Law Implemented 633.45(1)(a), 633.508(2) FS. History–New 9-15-02, Formerly 4A-62.005, Repealed 6-23-11.*

**69A-62.006 Requirements for Recognition as a Fire Department.**

*Rulemaking Authority 633.104(1), 633.508 FS. Law Implemented 633.45(1)(a), 633.508 FS. History–New 9-6-04, Repealed 3-19-13.*

**69A-62.007** **Minimum Requirements for Class 9 Protection.**

*Rulemaking Authority 633.104(1), 633.508 FS. Law Implemented 633.45(1)(a), 633.508 FS. History–New 9-6-04, Amended 1-1-09, Repealed 3-19-13.*

**69A-62.020 Definitions.**

Unless otherwise specified herein, for purposes of this rule chapter the definitions of the words and terms contained in Section 440.02, F.S., apply. For the purposes of part II of this rule chapter, unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the following definitions also apply:

(1) “Firefighter Employee Safety and Health Remediation Plan” means a written training program developed by a carrier, individual self-insurer, self-insurance fund, or firefighter employer or a combination thereof for a firefighter employer’s implementation when the firefighter employer has been identified as having a high frequency or severity of injuries or workers’ compensation insurance claims that is higher than the average for firefighter employers and includes any safety and health program which has been adopted by a firefighter employer and approved by the Division. It shall serve as a guide to safe work practices for firefighter employees.

(2) “Firefighter Employer Comprehensive Safety and Health Program” means a particular written plan developed from a Workplace Safety and Health Program provided by an insurance carrier, group self-insurance fund, individual self-insurer, or by an individual firefighter employer. It is designed to ensure that the firefighter employer has a structured and integrated safety and health management program within its organization, which is specifically designed to reduce or control the hazards of the firefighter employer’s workplace and the frequency of workplace injuries and occupational diseases. Said plan is permitted to be part of an overall Workplace Safety and Health Program for the municipality, county, special district, or other unit of local government.

(3) “Frequency” means the number of workplace injuries and occupational diseases reported to the Division of Workers’ Compensation, occurring over a one-year period, and resulting in a lost time case as defined in subsection (5), below.

(4) “Frequency Rate” means the figure which results after using the formula for determining the frequency rate provided in Rule 69A-62.023, F.A.C.

(5) “Lost Time Case” means an injury or illness which results in the firefighter employee requiring initial medical care at a medical care facility and involves a loss of time or service beyond the time required for initial treatment and his or her inability to return to normal duty upon his or her next scheduled work period.

(6) “OSHA” means the Occupational Safety and Health Administration as created by the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970, 29 U.S.C. Sections 651-678.

(7) “Safety and Health Standard” or “Standard” means any of the safety and health standards adopted by rule of the division and which applies to a specific workplace. These standards are minimum standards upon which all safety and health risk assessments can be made.

(8) “Safety and Health Inspection” means the risk assessment process by division personnel of a firefighter employer’s work environment as follows:

(a) Analyzing existing conditions and operations that may create hazards;

(b) Identifying signs of ineffective safety and health policies or practices; and,

(c) Identifying safety and health program deficiencies.

(9) “Severity” means the extent of the workers’ compensation medical and indemnity benefits which result or will result from the workplace injuries that a firefighter employer has reported to the Division of Workers’ Compensation.

(10) “Shall” means that the application or procedure that follows is mandatory and “shall” is only used in this context in these rules.

(11) “Will” means that the application or procedure that follows is to take place in the future and in this context “will” is never used to indicate any degree of requirement of an application or procedure.

(12) “Workplace Safety and Health Program” means the written program of a workers’ compensation carrier, group self-insurance fund, or individual self-insurer for a government unit. It is to be used by their policyholders, members or themselves as a guide in developing a specific firefighter employer’s “Firefighter Employer Comprehensive Safety and Health Program.”

*Rulemaking Authority 633.522 FS. Law Implemented 633.522 FS. History–New 9-6-04.*

**69A-62.021 Minimum Requirements for a Firefighter Employer Comprehensive Safety and Health Program.**

(1) Safety Policy. Each firefighter employer shall issue and make available to all firefighter employees a safety policy containing a clear and concise view of the firefighter employer’s determination that safety and health management shall be of primary importance and that all employment and places of employment shall be free of recognizable workplace and environmental hazards. The safety policy shall delegate responsibilities with respect to implementing the safety and health program.

(2) Safety Policies and Procedures. Each firefighter employer shall develop and implement a set of safety policies and procedures that shall be at least equivalent to Rules 69A-62.001 through 69A-62.045, F.A.C.

(3) Safety and Health Training Program. Each firefighter employer shall implement a written safety and health training program, which shall address or include:

(a) Training, by supervisors or trained instructors, of new firefighter employees and firefighter employees transferring to new jobs, on the operating procedures of vehicles and equipment to be utilized by the firefighter employee.

(b) Instructional training for supervisors which includes management, incident command, and control.

(c) Specialized training as required by the rules of the division for those firefighter employees and supervisors who provide response, rescue and or mitigation to non-traditional fire suppression activities.

(d) The firefighter employer shall ensure and document that each authorized emergency vehicle operator has completed a 16-hour course of instruction on driving an authorized emergency vehicle, as defined by Section 316.003(1), F.S., which includes, at a minimum, classroom and behind-the-wheel training in a vehicle of the largest size, type and class used for emergency response by the firefighter employer. Additionally, emergency vehicle operators shall be familiarized with any firefighter employer vehicles prior to operating the vehicle. The training shall consist of the following:

1\. Classroom Training.

a. Legal aspects of authorized emergency vehicle operators.

b. Selecting routes and reporting emergency operation.

c. The practice of defensive driving.

d. Accident avoidance.

e. Principles of vehicle control.

f. Routine safety checks of vehicle.

2\. Practical.

a. Braking and control braking.

b. Backing; road position, fender judgment and steering technique.

c. Slalom; steering technique and chassis set.

d. Turn-around-steering technique; fender judgment, road position, controlled braking, controlled acceleration, understeer, oversteer and chassis set. 

A list of approved courses/providers may be obtained from the Safety Program Office of the Bureau of Fire Standards and Training by calling (352)369-2800. Fire Department or Training Center requests for the approval of other courses must be directed to the same office.

(e) Goals and objectives of the safety training program(s).

(f) Person(s) responsible for safety and the person(s) responsible for the conduct of safety training.

(g) Specific method(s) of presentation.

(h) A procedure for and the analysis of accidents, illnesses and injuries experienced by the firefighter employer to determine both the cause of the incident and methods for future prevention.

(i) A training program outline of classes to be delivered including topics and objectives.

(j) A hazard identification system.

(k) Training. Each firefighter employer shall provide training and education for all firefighters and supervisory personnel commensurate with those duties and functions that such firefighters and supervisory personnel are expected to perform. Such training and education shall be provided to firefighters and supervisory personnel before they perform any emergency activities or other activities requiring such training. Supervisory personnel shall be provided with training and education which is more comprehensive than that provided to the general firefighters.

(4) Each firefighter employer shall assure that training and education are conducted frequently enough to assure that each firefighter is able to perform the firefighter’s assigned duties and functions satisfactorily and safely. All such training shall be documented and a permanent record of attendance shall be kept.

(5) The quality of the training and education programs for firefighters and officers shall be similar to the courses or curriculum of the Florida State Fire College.

(6) Each firefighter employer shall inform each firefighter about known special hazards such as storage and use of flammable liquids and gases, toxic chemicals, radioactive sources, and water reactive substances, to which they may be exposed during fire and other emergencies. The firefighters shall also be advised of any changes that occur in relation to the special hazards. The firefighter employer shall develop and make available for inspection by firefighters written procedures that describe the actions to be taken in situations involving the special hazards and shall include these in the training and education program.

(7) Policy for enforcement of safety rules and regulations.

(a) Accident Investigation Program. Each firefighter employer shall implement an accident investigation program and shall investigate and record all accidents and near misses involving personnel, including medical only injuries, and accidents in which equipment or motor vehicles are damaged. A near miss is an incident in which no property was damaged and no personal injury sustained, but where, given a slight shift in time, position, or other circumstance, damage or injury would or might have occurred. The investigation shall determine all obtainable facts of each accident and cite cause factors and recommend corrective action.

(b) Incident Reporting. Each firefighter employer shall use the United States Fire Administration’s National Fire Incident Reporting System Fire Service Casualty Module (NFIRS-5), [http://www.flrules.org/Gateway/reference.asp?No=Ref-08856](), to report all firefighter employee injuries, deaths, or exposures, including casualties that occur in conjunction both with incident responses and with non-incident events such as station duties or training. The Fire Service Casualty Module (NFIRS-5) (January 2015) is hereby incorporated by reference; however, the Division shall accept earlier versions of the Fire Service Casualty Module (NFIRS-5). The NFIRS software is available as free desktop and web-based applications from the United States Fire Administration at https://www.nfirs.fema.gov/ or as NFIRS standard-compliant products that can be purchased from software vendors at https://www.usfa.fema.gov/nfirs/vendors/active\_vendors.html. A firefighter employer that does not have internet access may print out the NFIRS-5 form, complete it with ink, and mail it to 11655 Northwest Gainesville Road, Ocala, Florida 34482-1486.

(c) The Fire Service Casualty Module (NFIRS-5) shall record all injuries, including type of accident, agencies, nature or type of injury, body location, the specific activity at the time of the injury or occurrence, cause of injury, and contributing causes of injury. Such reports shall also contain any event, injury, or occurrence enumerated in Section 112.181, 112.1815, or 112.1816, F.S., to which the presumptions therein are applicable.

(d) Each firefighter employer must document occupational injuries, disease diagnoses, including cancer, illnesses, mental health injuries, post-traumatic stress disorder, and fatalities using the “Fire Service Log and Summary of Occupational Injuries, Disease Diagnoses, Illnesses, and Fatalities,” DFS-K4-1568, effective (09/22), <https://www.flrules.org/Gateway/reference.asp?No=Ref-15119>, which is incorporated by reference (sometimes referred to as the “log and summary”). A copy of the DFS-K4-1568 may be obtained by writing the Bureau of Fire Standards and Training, 11655 Northwest Gainesville Road, Ocala, Florida 34482-1486 or by downloading the document from the Bureau’s website at https://www.myfloridacfo.com/division/sfm/bfst/bfstforms.htm. The firefighter employer or person who supervises the preparation of the log and summary shall sign the log and summary. Instructions for completing the log and summary are available on the Directions for Completing Fire Service Casualty Report, DFS-K4-1569, effective (09/22), <http://www.flrules.org/Gateway/reference.asp?No=Ref-15120>, which is incorporated by reference. A copy of the DFS-K4-1569 may be obtained by writing to the Division of State Fire Marshal, Department of Financials Services, 200 East Gaines Street, Tallahassee, Florida 32399-0340, or by downloading the document from the Bureau’s website: https://www.myfloridacfo.com/division/sfm/bfst/bfstforms.htm.

(e) Each of the records required under paragraphs (7)(a) through (d), shall be created on a calendar year basis beginning January 1 and ending December 31 of each year.

(f) In addition to the records required in paragraphs (7)(a) through (d), each firefighter employer shall create and maintain records required by Rule 69L-56.401, F.A.C.

(g) Each occupational injury, disease diagnosis, illness, and fatality must be recorded on either the NFIRS-5 or the log and summary within six (6) days of the firefighter employer learning of the occurrence.

*Rulemaking Authority 633.508, 633.518 FS. Law Implemented 633.508, 633.518, 633.520, 633.522 FS. History–New 9-6-04, Amended 6-6-07, 1-1-09, 5-22-11, 12-12-17, 2-20-23.*

**69A-62.022 Firefighter Employer Safety and Health Compliance Plan.**

(1) Firefighter employers identified through Rule 69A-62.023, F.A.C., by an investigative recommendation or by a substantiated complaint, shall be inspected for compliance with the requirements of rule Chapter 69A-62, F.A.C. Deficiencies and recommendations, if any, will be noted in an inspection report delivered to the firefighter employer electronically. No later than one hundred twenty (120) days after receipt of the inspection report the firefighter employer shall submit a Firefighter Employer Safety and Health Compliance Plan (Plan) to the Division.

(2) The Plan shall specify the action to be taken and the time needed for the firefighter employer to correct each deficiency identified and address each recommendation made in the inspection report. Any individual deficiency specifying a completion time greater than one year from the date of submission is not acceptable unless necessary to achieve the correction and justified in the Plan. The plan shall be:

(a) Approved if it includes the correction of all deficiencies and addresses all recommendations noted with a completion date that is either less than one year from the date of submission, or a later date which is justified in the Plan;

(b) Deemed approved if not disapproved electronically within 60 days of receipt; and,

(c) Disapproved if all deficiencies and recommendations are not addressed or a completion date greater than one year from the date of Plan submission is not justified.

(3) If a firefighter employer fails to submit a timely Plan to the Division, if the Plan is not approved after one re-submission, or if deficiencies are not timely corrected in accordance with the approved Plan, the firefighter employer shall be subject to a penalty as prescribed in Section 633.526, F.S., or as otherwise provided by law.

(4) The Division shall conduct a re-inspection at a mutually agreeable time but in no case longer than 1 year from the date of Plan approval.

*Rulemaking Authority 633.506, 633.522 FS. Law Implemented 633.512, 633.522 FS. History–New 9-6-04, Amended 6-6-07, 5-22-11.*

**69A-62.023 Criteria for Identifying Firefighter Employers with a High Frequency or Severity of Injuries.**

(1) Definitions.

(a) “Severe injury” means a line of duty injury that results in:

1\. Fatality;

2\. Loss of a limb;

3\. Loss or impairment of a bodily member, organ or mental faculty;

4\. More than 24 hours of hospitalization; or

5\. Permanent disfigurement to a commonly visible portion of the body.

(b) “Lost time/indemnity case” means an “injury/indemnity” as defined in subsection 69L-56.002(41), F.A.C., or a “Medical only to lost time case” as defined in subsection 69L-56.002(45), F.A.C.

(c) “Firefighter employer average frequency of lost time injuries” equals the total of all lost time injuries in a calendar year experienced by a firefighter employer, divided by the total number of employer firefighter employees.

(d) “Statewide average frequency of lost time injuries” equals the total of all lost time injuries experienced by all firefighter employees in the state in a calendar year divided by the total number of firefighter employees experiencing lost time injuries in the state.

(e) “Firefighter employees” are those volunteer and career firefighters whose names are submitted by firefighter employers to the State Fire Marshal pursuant to Rule 69A-37.0335, F.A.C., and this rule chapter.

(f) “Most recent verified data” means the latest complete calendar year data acquired from the Department’s Division of Workers’ Compensation, verified with the firefighter employer.

(2) Any firefighter employer experiencing:

(a) A more than 20 percent higher average frequency of lost time injuries than the statewide average; or

(b) A severe injury related to a violation of this rule chapter that was investigated by the Department during the same period, is a Firefighter Employer with a High Frequency or Severity of Injuries for purposes of Sections 633.506 and 633.522, F.S., and this rule chapter.

(3) The most recent verified data will be used to calculate the number of lost time injuries in subsection (2). The average statewide lost time injuries, individual employer injuries, and number of firefighter employees from the same period of time will be used in the calculation.

(4) A firefighter employer identified as having a high frequency or severity of injuries must submit a firefighter employee safety and health program in accordance with Rule 69A-62.021, F.A.C., for approval by the State Fire Marshal in accordance with Section 633.522, F.S. The Department will use the safety and health program to inspect the identified firefighter employer. If a firefighter employer so identified has not developed its own approved safety and health program, the safety and health program components set forth in Rule 69A-62.021, F.S., will be used to conduct the inspection.

*Rulemaking Authority 633.522 FS. Law Implemented 633.506, 633.522 FS. History–New 9-6-04, Amended 8-31-10.*

**69A-62.024 Standards for Construction, Repair, and Maintenance of Firefighter Employee Places of Employment and the Inspection, Testing and Maintenance of Fire Apparatus**.

(1)(a) “Firefighter employer” is defined in Section 633.504(2), F.S.

(b) “Firefighter place of employment” or “place of employment” is defined in Section 633.504(4), F.S.

(c) “Firefighter employee” is defined in Section 633.504(1), F.S. 

(2) A firefighter employer shall follow the Florida Building Code, which is incorporated by reference in Rule 61G20-1.001, F.A.C., and the Florida Fire Prevention Code, which is incorporated by reference in rule Chapter 69A-60, F.A.C., when constructing, altering or repairing a fire department facility.

(3) A firefighter employer shall maintain fire department facilities in accordance with the Florida Fire Prevention Code, which is incorporated by reference in rule Chapter 69A-60, F.A.C.

(4) A firefighter employer shall have a written policy that establishes a system to maintain firefighter employee places of employment in a safe working condition for all firefighter employees and to provide prompt correction of any safety or health hazard or code violation.

(5)(a) A firefighter employer shall inspect its firefighter employee places of employment at least quarterly for safety and health hazards. Inspections shall be documented and recorded using a form developed by the firefighter employer workplace safety committee or workplace safety coordinator. The form developed by the firefighter employer workplace safety committee or workplace safety coordinator shall contain the following items at a minimum:

1\. General station conditions.

2\. Housekeeping.

3\. Exits.

4\. Walking and working surfaces.

5\. Apparatus floors/maintenance areas.

6\. Laundry/cleaning/disinfecting areas.

7\. Building exterior and grounds.

8\. Decontamination rooms.

9\. Fire prevention and protection.

10\. Hazardous materials.

11\. Electrical wiring/fixtures/controls.

(b) Safety and health hazards identified during these inspections shall be reported to the firefighter employer workplace safety committee or workplace safety coordinator.

(6) A firefighter employer shall designate firefighter employee places of employment as tobacco free. Tobacco use shall be prohibited at all firefighter employee places of employment. This prohibition includes any building or area owned, operated, occupied, or used by a fire department on a routine basis and includes all types of tobacco and tobacco-like products, including smoked and smoke-less tobacco, other smokeable products, and electronic cigarettes.

(7) A firefighter employer shall take reasonable measures to prevent, control or reduce exposure and contamination of living and sleeping areas to exhaust emissions. Factors to be considered will vary for each individual fire station based upon: building design, size and construction; the number and types of fire apparatus that are stored or operated at the station; ventilation and air circulation; exhaust and emissions control systems; and monetary or budgetary limitations.

(8) A firefighter employer shall have a written policy that prohibits components of the protective ensemble that are contaminated from being allowed in sleeping/living areas and patient compartments. A firefighter employer shall take reasonable measures to prevent contaminated equipment from being carried in crew passenger areas. Factors to be considered will vary for each individual apparatus based upon: vehicle type, design, and size; the availability or location of storage compartments; and monetary or budgetary limitations.

(9) A firefighter employer utilizing poles to provide rapid access to lower floors shall ensure that the area around the pole hole is secured by means of a cover, enclosure, or other means to prevent someone from accidentally falling through the pole hole.

(10) A firefighter employer that provides emergency medical services shall have a written infection control policy that provides for disinfecting and cleaning of facilities, apparatus, and equipment.

(11) A firefighter employer shall have a written policy that provides a schedule for the maintenance, inspection and testing of fire apparatus. Fire pumps on apparatus shall be service tested at least annually. All aerial devices shall be inspected and service tested annually. All apparatus equipped with a compressed air foam system (CAFS) shall be tested annually.

*Rulemaking Authority 633.508(7) FS. Law Implemented 633.508(7), 633.520, 633.522 FS. History–New 5-26-15.*

<a name="_hlk499729421"></a>**69A-62.025 <a name="_hlk26796181"></a>Employer Cancer Prevention Best Practices.**

(1) Each employer, as defined in Section 112.191, F.S., should strive to achieve the best practices outlined in the <a name="_hlk52532299"></a>Employer Cancer Prevention Best Practices – Self-Assessment Tool, Form DFS-K4-2203, for the prevention of cancer as it relates to personal protective equipment, decontamination, fire suppression apparatus, and fire stations. Form DFS-K4-2203 (Eff. 01/20), which is hereby incorporated by reference, may be obtained on the following link: [https://www.flrules.org/Gateway/reference.asp?No=Ref-12411](); or on the Department’s website: myfloridacfo.com/Division/SFM.

(2) The best practices outlined in Form DFS-K4-2203 are based on the following standards:

<a name="_hlk52532787"></a>(a) National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) 1500, Standard on Fire Department Occupational Safety, Health, and Wellness Program (2018 Edition), which is hereby incorporated by reference;

(b) NFPA 1582, Standard on Comprehensive Occupational Medical Program for Fire Departments (2018 Edition), which is hereby incorporated by reference;

(c) NFPA 1851, Standard on Selection, Care, and Maintenance of Protective Ensembles for Structural Fire Fighting and Proximity Fire Fighting (2020 Edition), which is hereby incorporated by reference;

(d) NFPA 1901, Standard for Automotive Fire Apparatus (2016 Edition), which is hereby incorporated by reference;

(e) NFPA 1912, Standard for Fire Apparatus Refurbishing (2016 Edition), which is hereby incorporated by reference; and

(f) <a name="_hlk52532486"></a>Federal Emergency Management Agency’s (FEMA) Safety and Health Considerations for the Design of Fire and Emergency Medical Services Stations (April 2018), which is hereby incorporated by reference and available on the following link: [http://www.flrules.org/Gateway/reference.asp?No=Ref-12411](); or on the following FEMA website: <a name="_hlt40367153"></a><a name="_hlt40367154"></a><a name="_hlt39134186"></a><a name="_hlt39134187"></a><https://www.usfa.fema.gov/downloads/pdf/publications/design_of_fire_ems_stations.pdf>.

(3) The NFPA standards referenced in paragraphs (2)(a) through (e) are copyrighted materials that cannot be copied but may be: (i) viewed during regular business hours at the Division of State Fire Marshal, 325 John Knox Road, The Atrium, Third Floor, Tallahassee, Florida 32399-0322; (ii) viewed during regular business hours at the Florida Administrative Code and Register, R.A. Gray Building, 500 South Bronough Street, Tallahassee, Florida 32399-0250; (iii) accessed in a read-only, non-printable, non-downloadable format at the NFPA’s website at <a name="_hlk22890770"></a><https://www.nfpa.org/Codes-and-Standards/All-Codes-and-Standards/Free-access>; or (iv) purchased by contacting the NFPA at 1 Batterymarch Park, Quincy, Massachusetts 02169-7471; Phone 1(800)344-3555; Website <a name="_hlt22887700"></a><a name="_hlt22887701"></a>www.nfpa.org.

*Rulemaking Authority 112.1816(6), 633.520(2) FS. Law Implemented 112.1816, 633.520, 633.522 FS. History–New 11-26-20.*

**69A-62.030 Definitions.** 

For purposes of Rules 69A-62.030 through 69A-62.036, F.A.C., following definitions apply:

(1) “Abatement date” means a specific date provided by the division on the Notice of Violation on or before which the firefighter employer must correct a violation to avoid penalty. “Abatement” means and includes remediation.

(2) “Calendar year” means a given twelve month period that begins January 1 and ends December 31.

(3) “Establishment” means the single physical location of a workplace where the firefighter employer maintains records necessary to provide evidence of firefighter employer compliance with this rule chapter. Generally, an establishment is a single physical location where business is conducted. For firefighter employers engaged in activities that may be physically dispersed, the establishment shall be the Administrative Offices/Headquarters of the agency.

(4) “Fatality” means any firefighter employee death that occurs as a result of workplace injury, illness, or occupational disease and includes a firefighter employee death that results from workplace injury, illness, or occupational disease within one year of the report of the injury, illness, or occupational disease to the Division of Workers’ Compensation of the Department of Financial Services.

(5) “Hazard” means the risk of exposure to materials, processes, or operating procedures or practices that can produce injury, illness, occupational disease, or fatality.

(6) “Illness” or “occupational disease” means any abnormal condition or disorder, other than one resulting from an occupational injury, caused by exposure to environmental factors associated with employment. Illness includes acute and chronic illnesses or diseases caused by inhalation, absorption, ingestion, or direct contact with an environmental factor.

(7) “Investigation” means verification of firefighter employer compliance with the Act or division rule by a firefighter employer including firefighter employer requests, complaint investigations, fatality investigations, and serious safety investigations.

(8) “Serious incident” means any event arising out of the work and in the course of employment, as the result of which a firefighter employee is admitted into a hospital for a minimum period of twenty-four hours.

(9) “Violation” means noncompliance with the Act, a division rule, or an order of the division.

(10) “Workplace” means the physical location where firefighter employees perform their duties and includes the scene of a fire or other emergency. The Firefighter Employer is not responsible for the physical condition of any property not within its control or the control of its governmental unit.

*Rulemaking Authority 633.518 FS. Law Implemented 633.518 FS. History–New 9-6-04, Amended 6-30-14, 12-12-17.*

**69A-62.031 Right of Entry.**

A firefighter employer shall allow the division, on request and presentation of official credentials, without delay to enter and to inspect any place of employment at any reasonable time for the purpose of assuring compliance with the Act and this rule chapter.

*Rulemaking Authority 633.518 FS. Law Implemented 633.518 FS. History–New 9-6-04.*

**69A-62.032 Division Inspection or Investigation.**

(1) Under the Act, the division is authorized to conduct inspections or investigations for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the Act and division rules. The division shall conduct an inspection or investigation to determine jurisdiction, the occurrence of a violation, or to verify abatement. The division shall conduct an inspection or investigation by means of onsite inspection or investigation, telephone, correspondence, or personal interview, which may be in private.

(2) A firefighter employer may request the division to investigate the workplace to ensure compliance with the Act and division rules.

(3) The division shall not be required to provide notice of an inspection or investigation when the division is advised that a condition or practice that creates an “imminent danger” to the safety and health of workers.

(4) Upon entering a workplace, the division shall advise the person in charge of the work being performed at the workplace that the division intends to conduct an inspection or investigation.

(5) The division shall conduct an opening conference, explaining the purpose of the inspection or investigation, inspection or investigation procedures, and firefighter employer obligations and responsibilities.

(6) The division may but is not required to invite a representative of the firefighter employer or a firefighter employee, or both, to accompany the division during an inspection or investigation.

(7) The division shall consider evidence observed in plain view or obtained during an inspection or investigation, or otherwise obtained from a telephone or personal interview, correspondence, firefighter employer record, maintenance record, insurance record, laboratory report, or electronic information.

(8) After the inspection or investigation, the division shall conduct a closing conference with the firefighter employer to discuss any violations noticed, answer questions, explain penalty assessments, and identify abatement verification procedures, including the potential for a subsequent inspection or investigation by the division to verify abatement.

(9) The division shall issue a Notice of Violation prescribed in Rule 69A-62.034, F.A.C., for each violation identified by the division during an inspection or investigation at the completion of the inspection or investigation.

(10) Complaint Investigation.

(a) The division shall consider a complaint from any person who alleges a violation of the Act or a division rule. The complainant may elect to remain anonymous. The complainant must identify the location of the workplace that gives rise to the complaint and allege known particular facts that constitute a violation. A complaint may be oral or written.

(b) The division shall conduct an investigation of any complaint that facially establishes reasonable cause to believe that a violation exists or occurred.

(11) Fatality or Serious Incident Investigation or equipment failure.

(a) Each firefighter employer shall notify the Division of any fatality or serious incident on-duty injury that required a hospitalization period of greater than twenty-four (24) hours. The employer shall notify the Division via the Division’s 24 hour phone number (352)369-2813 within four (4) hours of the occurrence.

(b) The division shall conduct an investigation of each fatality or serious incident.

(c) The Division shall conduct an investigation of a fatality or serious incident involving equipment failure.

(12) If the division determines during an investigation that a firefighter employer’s failure to comply with the Act or a division rule directly contributed to a fatality or serious incident, the division shall issue to the firefighter employer a Notice of Violation specifying an immediate abatement date.

(13) The division shall conduct an investigation to verify abatement of a violation within six months after the issuance date of the Notice of Violation.

*Rulemaking Authority 633.128(1)(a), 633.518 FS. Law Implemented 633.502, 633.518 FS. History–New 9-6-04, Amended 6-30-14.*

**69A-62.033 Recordkeeping Responsibilities of Firefighter Employers.**

(1) All records required by rule Chapters 69A-62, 69A-37, 69L-56, F.A.C., or statutory Chapter 633 or 440, F.S., must be maintained for five (5) calendar years following the end of the calendar year during which they were created.

(2) Each firefighter employer shall maintain all records required under this rule chapter, either: 

(a) In the firehouse where the firefighter who is the subject of a report or record required by this rule chapter is injured, or;

(b) At another location identified by the firefighter employer by address and telephone number.

*Rulemaking Authority 633.508 FS. Law Implemented 633.508 FS. History–New 9-6-04, Amended 2-20-23.*

**69A-62.034 Notice of Violation.**

(1)(a) If the division determines that a firefighter employer is not in compliance with the Act or a division rule or order, the division shall issue to the firefighter employer a Notice of Violation* on Form DFS-K4-1566, revised July, 2004, which the division hereby adopts and incorporates herein, and which may be obtained by writing to the division at 11655 Northwest Gainesville Road, Ocala, Florida 34482-1486.

(b) The Notice of Violation shall specify the section of the statute, the rule violated, or the division order and set forth particular facts that support the division’s allegation of a violation, and set an abatement date not to exceed thirty days from the date of receipt of the Notice of Violation.

(c) The Notice of Violation is not final agency action; rather, it is a notice provided as a courtesy to the firefighter employer to give notice of matters the division considers to be in violation of the applicable statutes, rules, codes, standards, or other applicable requirement.

(d) If a notice assessing a penalty, as provided for in Rule 69A-62.036, F.A.C., is given to the firefighter employer, such action constitutes final agency action and is subject to Chapter 120, F.S.

(2) The division shall serve a Notice of Violation on the senior firefighter employer official at the workplace where the violation occurred, or on a firefighter employer contact or representative, and shall mail or otherwise deliver a copy to the official headquarters mailing address of record. The division shall serve a Notice of Violation personally, via United States mail, or otherwise as provided by law.

(3) Each Firefighter Employer shall bring into compliance any violation identified in the Notice of Violation on or before its abatement date. The division shall grant an extension of the original abatement date upon written request by the firefighter employer if anyone of the following criteria occurs:

(a) The Firefighter Employer experiences an incident or occurrence beyond the control of the firefighter employer, such as in the event of an identified hazard; or

(b) The Firefighter Employer provides proof of a forthcoming delivery of necessary contracted services or materials; or

(c) The Firefighter Employer takes remedial action to remove firefighter employees from the hazard.

(4) A firefighter employer shall file the firefighter employer’s copy of the Notice of Violation with the division, indicating the action taken by the firefighter employer to bring the noticed violation into compliance, the date action was taken, and the firefighter employer’s signature certifying abatement. Filing under this subsection means receipt by the division within ten days after the abatement date.

(5) If the division determines that the firefighter employer abated the noticed violation on or before the abatement date, the division shall dismiss the notice. If the firefighter employer fails to correct the violation on or before the abatement date, the division shall assess against the firefighter employer a civil penalty commensurate with Section 633.526, F.S., unless otherwise provided by division rule.

(6) The firefighter employer who receives a Notice of Violation may request the division to withdraw the Notice of Violation. The request must be in writing and received by the division on or before the abatement date. The division shall withdraw a Notice of Violation for good cause, as expressed in subsection (3), shown by the firefighter employer.

(7) If the division finds no violation during an investigation on-site, the division will so indicate on a Notice of Violation if requested by the firefighter employer.

(8)(a) Each firefighter employee of a firefighter employer covered under the Act shall comply with:

1\. Rules adopted or orders issued by the division;

2\. Reasonable workplace safety and health standards; and,

3\. Rules, policies, procedures, and work practices established by the firefighter employer or the workplace safety committee.

(b) A firefighter employee who knowingly fails to comply with this subsection may be disciplined or discharged by the firefighter employer.

*Rulemaking Authority 633.508 FS. Law Implemented 633.508 FS. History–New 9-6-04.*

**69A-62.035 Safety Training.**

After a firefighter employer has abated a noticed violation that created a particular hazard, the Firefighter Employer shall provide to each affected firefighter employee safety training designed to prevent recurrence of the violation within the time frame specified by the Division. Safety training shall include at least recognition and avoidance of the particular hazard and knowledge of the protective measures required to prevent injury. Abatement of a safety training violation under this subsection shall include completion and documentation of the training. If a condition for abatement of a noticed violation includes safety training and the firefighter employer fails to provide the training to all affected firefighter employees, each affected firefighter employee not trained constitutes a separate violation. All training shall be documented and a copy placed in each affected employee’s personnel file.

*Rulemaking Authority 633.508, 633.526 FS. Law Implemented 633.508, 633.526 FS. History–New 9-6-04.*

**69A-62.036 Procedures Relating to Penalties.**

(1) The division shall issue a notice assessing a penalty to a firefighter employer that fails to timely abate a violation of the Act or division rule.

(2) The division shall serve the notice assessing a penalty in the manner provided for by law and shall insure that such notice is provided to the administrative officer in charge of the fire department or his or her designee.

(3)(a) If an investigation to verify abatement reveals that a previously-noticed violation exists, the division shall assess against the firefighter employer a penalty for a continuing violation, which shall accrue from the original abatement date indicated on the Notice of Violation. If the firefighter employer demonstrates conclusively to the division by documentary evidence, such as purchase order, payment receipt, or work order, that the firefighter employer corrected the previously noticed violation on or before the abatement date, the division shall not assess a penalty for a continuing violation.

(b) Any previously noticed violation that recurs after the six-month abatement period constitutes a separate violation, which is independent of a previously noticed violation and shall be separately charged.

(4) Except as otherwise provided in this rule, the division shall assess against a firefighter employer who violates the Act, such penalty as is permitted in Section 633.526, F.S. If the division grants an extension of the abatement date and the firefighter employer fails to timely abate, the penalty shall accrue from the original abatement date on the Notice of Violation.

(5) The division shall assess against a firefighter employer a penalty for a violation that is commensurate with frequency or severity, or both.

(a) In assessing a penalty based on frequency, the division shall consider:

1\. The number of safety and health violations cited against the firefighter employer as the result of a complaint or investigation; and,

2\. The number of identical, similar, or related safety and health violations for which the firefighter employer was prosecuted administratively, criminally, or civilly.

(b) Unless the firefighter employer violates a provision specifically enumerated in paragraph (a), above, the division shall assess a penalty that considers:

1\. The risk or potential risk of injury or exposure to injury that results from the violation or violations; and,

2\. The number of firefighter employees affected by the violation or violations.

(6) A firefighter employer that violates Rule 69A-62.031, F.A.C., (right of entry) is subject to criminal prosecution pursuant to Section 633.526, F.S., and to administrative prosecution under the Act.

(7) The division has authority to seek remedies, including injunctive relief, by making appropriate filings with the Circuit Court of the Second Judicial Circuit (Leon County) to assure compliance with the Act or division rule or order.

(8) The firefighter employer may request mitigation of the penalty by filing a written request for mitigation with the division. The division shall determine whether to mitigate a penalty after considering:

(a) The knowledge of the firefighter employer of the violation or whether the firefighter employer ought to have known of the violation with due diligence;

(b) The remedial action taken by the firefighter employer in good faith to correct the violation or violations cited;

(c) The promptness of the firefighter employer’s remedial action to correct the violation or violations cited; and,

(d) The demonstrated commitment by the firefighter employer to avert recurrence of the violation or violations and to assure future compliance with the Act and division rules.

(9) A firefighter employer shall be assessed a penalty which must be paid to the division within 30 days of the issuance date of the Notice assessing a penalty. The payment must include the case file number and penalty number(s) specified on the Notice assessing a penalty. Penalty payments shall be addressed to: Division of State Fire Marshal, 200 East Gaines Street, Tallahassee, Florida 32399-0340. The division shall deposit all penalties collected in the Florida Insurance Regulatory Trust Fund.

(10) The notice assessing a penalty shall be final agency action and shall be subject to Chapter 120, F.S.

*Rulemaking Authority 633.526 FS. Law Implemented 633.526 FS. History–New 9-6-04.*

**69A-62.040 Definitions.** 

Part IV of this rule chapter incorporates by reference the definitions for “accident” and “injury” contained in Section 440.02, F.S., and the definition of “occupational disease” contained in Section 440.151(2), F.S. Furthermore, with respect to part IV, the following definitions apply:

(1) “Calendar year” means a given twelve-month period that begins on January 1 and ends on December 31.

(2) “Firefighter employee representative” means a firefighter employee chosen to serve on a safety committee, who does not normally serve in a supervisory capacity.

(3) “Fatality” means a firefighter employee death that occurs as a result of workplace injury, illness, or occupational disease, and includes a firefighter employee death that results from workplace injury, illness, or occupational disease within one year of its report to the Division of Workers’ Compensation of the Department of Financial Services.

(4) “Hazard” means the risk of exposure to materials, processes, or operating procedures or practices that can produce injury, illness, occupational disease, or fatality.

(5) A firefighter employer “identified” means a firefighter employer identified by the division as having three or more compensable injuries in the period of three calendar years immediately preceding adoption of the rule chapter, or thereafter in the most recent period of three calendar years.

(6) “Incidence Rate” or “Frequency rate” shall be determined by the method described in Rule 69A-62.023, F.A.C.

(7) “Illness” or “occupational illness” means any abnormal condition or disorder, other than one resulting from an injury, caused by exposure to environmental factors associated with employment. Illness includes acute and chronic illnesses or diseases caused by inhalation, absorption, ingestion, or direct contact with an environmental factor.

(8) “Safety committee,” “workplace safety committee,” or “committee” means a group of firefighter employer and firefighter employee representatives organized pursuant to this rule chapter that actively participates in accident prevention and that recommends improvements and promotes safety and health in the workplace. The committee is permitted to be part of a government wide unit (municipality, county, or special district) workplace safety committee provided that the requirements herein specified are met.

(9) “Safety-related incident” means a condition, event, or series of events that indicates the existence or occurrence of a hazard, regardless of whether the incident contributes to an injury, illness, occupational disease, or fatality.

(10) “Safety program” means a particular written safety and health program, implemented by a firefighter employer, that:

(a) Provides the means to eliminate, reduce, or control recognized hazards in the work or workplace;

(b) Provides the means to eliminate, reduce, or control the frequency or severity of workplace injuries and occupational diseases;

(c) Is specific to the work being performed;

(d) Is specific to the environment where the work is being performed; and,

(e) Is easily understood by firefighter employees.

(11) “Scheduled meeting” means a convening of a safety committee after reasonable notice to its members and publication of an agenda of subjects to be addressed.

(12) “Workplace” means the physical location in Florida where firefighter employees perform their duties, and includes the scene of a fire and any other emergency incident scene.

(13) “Workplace safety coordinator” means a person designated by the firefighter employer who actively participates in accident prevention, recommends improvements, and promotes safety and health in the workplace. In the same manner as subsection (8) above, the workplace safety coordinator is permitted to be a government entity-wide position.

*Rulemaking Authority 633.522 FS. Law Implemented 633.522 FS. History–New 9-6-04.*

**69A-62.041 Scope.**

Except as provided in Rule 69A-62.042, F.A.C., Part IV, of this rule chapter applies only to a firefighter employer of twenty or more firefighter employees or to a firefighter employer of fewer than twenty firefighter employees that the division “identified.”

*Rulemaking Authority 633.522 FS. Law Implemented 633.522 FS. History–New 9-6-04.*

**69A-62.042 Firefighter Employer Requirements.**

(1) A firefighter employer shall establish, maintain, and administer a safety committee in the workplace. A firefighter employer of fewer than twenty firefighter employees may appoint a Safety Coordinator in lieu of a Safety Committee.

(a) The firefighter employer shall determine the total number of members that serve on the safety committee; determine the length of tenure for all members of the safety committee; and ensure that the number of firefighter employer representatives shall not exceed the number of firefighter employee representatives.

(b) The firefighter employer shall identify the firefighter employee representatives for the safety committee from firefighter employees who are volunteers or who are elected from their co-workers. When sufficient firefighter employee representation is not otherwise met, the firefighter employer shall select and appoint firefighter employees to the committee. If a collective bargaining agreement provides for the establishment of a safety committee, the establishment of the safety committee pursuant to this section shall be in accordance with the collective bargaining agreement.

(c) The firefighter employer shall ensure that the safety committee convenes in accordance with the following protocol:

1\. The committee shall convene its first scheduled meeting not more than forty-five days after the date of its inception.

2\. Thereafter, the committee shall convene its scheduled meetings at least once each quarter during the calendar year and at such other times as a majority of the committee membership agrees or the firefighter employer requires.

(d) The firefighter employer shall consider and issue a timely written response to each written recommendation of the safety committee issued.

(e) The firefighter employer shall maintain complete and accurate minutes of committee meetings and communicate the location and availability of the minutes to all firefighter employees. Safety committee records, or true copies thereof, shall be maintained by the firefighter employer for a period of not less than three calendar years.

(f) The firefighter employer shall maintain and administer a safety committee by assuring that the committee complies with these rules.

(2) If the firefighter employer operates multiple workplaces that are geographically separated, the firefighter employer is permitted to have a centralized safety committee represent the safety and health concerns of all the locations, or, alternatively, the firefighter employer is permitted to have a separate safety committee at each location.

(3) A firefighter employer of fewer than twenty firefighter employees that the division “identified” as having a high frequency rate for injuries shall establish and administer a workplace safety committee or designate a workplace safety coordinator.

*Rulemaking Authority 633.522 FS. Law Implemented 633.522 FS. History–New 9-6-04.*

**69A-62.043 Duties and Functions of the Safety Committee and Workplace Safety Coordinator.**

(1) The safety committee, under the direction of the firefighter employer, shall:

(a) Establish and communicate procedures for conducting internal safety inspections of the workplace. When approved by the firefighter employer, these procedures shall be used to evaluate the effectiveness of engineering, administrative, and personal protective control measures provided by the firefighter employer to protect firefighter employees from recognized hazards in the work and work environment;

(b) Establish and communicate procedures approved by the firefighter employer by which the firefighter employer shall investigate all workplace accidents, safety-related incidents, reportable injuries, illnesses, diseases, and fatalities;

(c) Evaluate the effectiveness of and recommend improvements to the firefighter employer’s safety rules, policies, and procedures for accident and illness prevention programs in the workplace and, when approved by the firefighter employer, ensure that written updates and changes to rules, policies, and procedures of the safety programs are completed;

(d) Establish and communicate guidelines for the training of members on the requirements of this rule chapter;

(e) Post the scheduled date, time, and location of committee meetings in a conspicuous place where firefighter employees normally gather;

(f) Provide minutes of the committee meetings in a conspicuous place where firefighter employees normally gather and provide a copy thereof to individual firefighter employees upon written request; and,

(g) Retain in the workplace all original written communications between the firefighter employer and the committee, or true copies thereof, for a period of not less than three calendar years.

(2) A majority of the members which shall constitute a quorum of the membership of a committee is required before official business may be transacted at a meeting.

(3) A committee organized pursuant to this rule chapter shall operate solely for the purposes required herein and may not substitute as a collective bargaining representative of firefighter employees on unrelated matters.

(4) The workplace safety coordinator, under the direction of the firefighter employer, shall:

(a) Establish and communicate procedures for conducting internal safety inspections of the workplace. When approved by the firefighter employer, these procedures shall be used to evaluate the effectiveness of engineering, administrative, and personal protective control measures provided by the firefighter employer to protect firefighter employees from recognized hazards in the work and work environment;

(b) Establish and communicate procedures approved by the firefighter employer by which the firefighter employer shall investigate all workplace accidents, safety-related incidents, injuries, illnesses, diseases, and fatalities;

(c) Evaluate the effectiveness of and recommend improvements to the firefighter employer’s safety rules, policies, and procedures for accident and illness prevention programs in the workplace and, when approved by the firefighter employer, ensure that written updates and changes to rules, policies, and procedures of the safety programs are completed; and,

(d) Seek the input of firefighter employees in complying with the responsibilities of this section.

*Rulemaking Authority 633.522 FS. Law Implemented 633.522 FS. History–New 9-6-04.*

**69A-62.044 Firefighter Employer Evaluation by the Division.**

(1) The division is permitted to conduct an evaluation of a firefighter employer to assure compliance with the provisions of this rule chapter.

(2) Firefighter employers subject to an evaluation by the division shall:

(a) Meet with a representative of the division;

(b) Assign a contact person to work with the division representative; and

(c) Provide requested information pertaining to firefighter employer responsibilities specified in this rule chapter.

(3) The evaluation of a firefighter employer shall be conducted at the firefighter employer’s place of business.

*Rulemaking Authority 633.522 FS. Law Implemented 633.522 FS. History–New 9-6-04.*

**69A-62.045 Penalties.** 

A firefighter employer who violates the Act, any provision of this rule chapter, or any lawful order of the division is subject to penalties authorized by the Act.

*Rulemaking Authority 633.522 FS. Law Implemented 633.522 FS. History–New 9-6-04.*

**69A-62.050 Official State Firefighter Memorial Flag.**

(1) Scope. This rule sets forth the conditions of design, production, distribution, and display of the official state Firefighter Memorial Flag to honor firefighters who have died in the line of duty.

(2) Purpose. To preserve the reverence and dignity associated with the flag, and those whose sacrifice the flag honors.

(3) Design. In addition to the design specifications set forth in statute, the official flag shall be produced in size 5' x 8', and be printed on 200 Denier Solarmax nylon fabric or a fabric of equivalent weather resistance and durability. The flag shall be finished with a canvas heading and two brass grommets, with two rows of lock-stitching on the top and bottom edges, and four rows of stitching on the fly end. The flag shall carry the words “Official State of Florida Firefighter Memorial Flag.”

(4) Production. The Department shall utilize a competitive process to choose a vendor to produce the flag. The Department will enter into an Agreement with the Vendor awarded the contract which will include the price at which the flag will be offered to the public as well as to the Department, the number of days to deliver any flag ordered and the cost for shipping. The contract will include a provision requiring the vendor to provide a copy of this rule, with every flag purchased. The contact information for the winning vendor shall be posted on the State Fire Marshal’s website.

(5) Distribution. The State Fire Marshal honors Florida Firefighters who have died in the line of duty at a Firefighter Memorial Service conducted every year in the month of October at the State Fire College in Ocala, Florida. The official state Firefighter Memorial Flag will be formally presented at this service to the next of kin of every Florida firefighter honored at the ceremony, at no charge to the recipient. Each flag so presented shall carry a note indicating the following: “This flag is being presented to you by courtesy of the people of Florida” and no other name. 

(6) Display. The flag may be displayed at memorial or funeral services of firefighters who have died in the line of duty, at firefighter memorials, at fire stations, at the Fallen Firefighter Memorial located at the Florida State Fire College in Ocala, by the families of fallen firefighters, and any occasion which honors the fire service in a reverent and honorable manner which does not violate Section 256.05, F.S.

*Rulemaking Authority 256.15(3) FS. Law Implemented 256.15 FS. History–New 8-23-10.*
