**CHAPTER 69A-70**

**CARBON MONOXIDE**

69A-70.001	Scope

69A-70.005	Codes Adopted

69A-70.010	Installation Requirements

**69A-70.001 Scope.**

The rules in this chapter establish the installation requirements for carbon monoxide detectors as required under subsection 509.211(4), F.S., for public lodging establishments that contain a boiler regulated under chapter 554, F.S.

*Rulemaking Authority 509.211(4) FS. Law Implemented 509.211(4) FS. History–New 1-18-18.*

**69A-70.005 Codes Adopted.**

The Department of Financial Services hereby adopts and incorporates by reference the following national standards as to the installation of carbon monoxide detectors:

(1) The National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) 720-2015 edition, Standard for the Installation of Carbon Monoxide (CO) Detection and Warning Equipment. Copies of NFPA publications can be obtained from the National Fire Protection Association, Inc., 1 Batterymarch Park, Quincy, Massachusetts 02169-7471.

(2) Underwriters Laboratories, Inc., Standard 2017, Standard for General-Purpose Signaling Devices and Systems (December 2008). Copies of Underwriters Laboratories (UL) standards can be obtained from Underwriters Laboratories, Inc., 333 Pfingston Road, Northbrook, IL 60062.

(3) Underwriters Laboratories, Inc., Standard 2075, Standard for Gas and Vapor Detectors and Sensors (March 2013). Copies of UL standards can be obtained from Underwriters Laboratories, Inc., 333 Pfingston Road, Northbrook, IL 60062.

(4) All standards adopted and incorporated by reference in these rules are also available for public inspection during regular business hours at the Division of State Fire Marshal, currently located on the Third Floor (Room 326) of the Atrium Building, 325 John Knox Road, Tallahassee, Florida 32303.

*Rulemaking Authority 509.211(4) FS. Law Implemented 509.211(4) FS. History–New 1-18-18.*

**69A-70.010 Installation Requirements.**

(1) Where required by subsection 509.211(4), F.S., the installation of carbon monoxide detector devices shall comply with the requirements of NFPA 720, as adopted in rule 69A-70.005, F.A.C.

(2) Detector devices shall bear the label of a nationally recognized testing laboratory and have been tested and listed as complying with the most recent Underwriters Laboratories, Inc., Standard 2075, as adopted in rule 69A-70.005, F.A.C.

(3) The requirements herein are in addition to the requirement imposed by subsection 509.211(4), F.S., that states devices shall be integrated with the public lodging establishment’s fire detection system or connected to a control unit or combination system that will prevent the boiler from operating until it is reset manually.

(4) Business owners with boilers required to be inspected in accordance with The Boiler Safety Act, chapter 554, Florida Statutes, must post in the boiler room the “Certificate of Carbon Monoxide Detector Installation [http://www.flrules.org/Gateway/reference.asp?No=Ref-08919](),” Form DFS-K3-2170 (effective September 2017), which is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference, must be signed by a state-licensed alarm system contractor, a state-certified electrical contractor, or a state-licensed boiler installer indicating the required detector has been installed and has been integrated with the public lodging establishment’s fire detection system or boiler safety circuit as described and required by this rule. A copy of Form DFS-K3-2170 may be obtained by written request to the Bureau of Fire Prevention, Boiler Safety Section, 200 East Gaines Street, Tallahassee, Florida 32399-0342.

*Rulemaking Authority 509.211(4) FS. Law Implemented 509.211(4) FS. History–New 1-18-18.*
