**CHAPTER 69A-42**

**UNIFORM FIRE SAFETY STANDARDS FOR**

**MOBILE HOME PARKS AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARKS**

69A-42.001 	Title

69A-42.002 	Purpose

69A-42.003 	Definitions

69A-42.004 	Discretionary Powers of the Authority Having Jurisdiction

69A-42.0041 	Fire Separation Requirements

69A-42.005 	Standards of the National Fire Protection Association Adopted

**69A-42.001 Title.**

The rules comprising rule chapter 69A-42, F.A.C., shall be known as the “Uniform Fire Safety Standards for Mobile Home Parks and Recreational Vehicle Parks.”

*Rulemaking Authority 633.104 FS. Law Implemented 633.104, 633.206 FS. History–New 5-1-84, Formerly 4A-42.01, Repromulgated 8-1-90, Formerly 4A-42.001.*

**69A-42.002 Purpose.**

The purpose of these rules is to establish uniform requirements that will provide a reasonable degree of safety from fire in mobile home parks and recreational vehicle parks. These rules apply to both existing and new mobile home parks and recreational vehicle parks, except that the provisions of section 633.104(4), F.S., are specifically applicable to existing mobile home parks. These rules try to avoid requirements that might result in unreasonable hardships or unnecessary inconveniences or interference with the normal use of the facilities.

*Rulemaking Authority 633.206(1)(b) FS. Law Implemented 633.104(1), 633.206 FS. History–New 5-1-84, Formerly 4A-42.02, Amended 8-1-90, 9-6-01, Formerly 4A-42.002.*

**69A-42.003** **Definitions.**

As used in this rule chapter, unless the context clearly requires otherwise.

(1) “Authority Having Jurisdiction” shall mean a duly authorized representative of an agency or agencies having legal enforcement authority, as described in section 633.118, F.S.

(2) “Approved” shall mean materials, devices, construction, and/or installations accepted by the authority having jurisdiction under the provisions of these rules by reason of tests or investigations conducted by it or by an agency satisfactory to the authority, based upon nationally accepted test standards or principles.

(3) “Mobile Home” shall have the same meaning as “Manufactured Home” set forth in NFPA 501A, adopted by reference in rule 69A-3.012, F.A.C.

(4) “Mobile Home Park” shall mean a place set aside and offered by a person or public body for the parking or accommodation of six or more mobile homes utilized for sleeping or eating for either direct or indirect remuneration to the owner, lessor, or operator of such place.

(5) “Recreational Vehicle Park” shall mean a place set aside and offered by a person or public body for the parking and accommodation of six or more recreational vehicles utilized for sleeping or eating for either direct or indirect remuneration to the owner, lessor, or operator of such place, and also includes buildings and sites set aside for group camping and similar recreational facilities.

*Rulemaking Authority 633.104(1), 633.206(1)(b) FS. Law Implemented 633.206 FS. History–New 5-1-84, Formerly 4A-42.03, Amended 8-1-90, 9-6-01, Formerly 4A-42.003, Amended 10-19-09.*

**69A-42.004 Discretionary Powers of the Authority Having Jurisdiction.**

The authority having jurisdiction may modify these rules under the following conditions:

(1) Any modification to this rule chapter must be in strict conformance with this section. No currently placed mobile home shall be displaced unless it is clearly evident in the opinion of the authority having jurisdiction that there is a threat of imminent danger to the health, safety or welfare of the general public.

(2) The authority having jurisdiction may allow alternative arrangements to accomplish this degree of safety, but in no case shall the modification afford less safety to life than compliance with the corresponding provisions contained in these rules for existing buildings.

(3) Nothing in these rules is intended to prevent the use of systems, methods, or devices of equivalent or superior quality, strength, fire resistance, effectiveness, durability, and safety to those prescribed by the authority having jurisdiction so long as the system, method, or device is of demonstrated equivalency and is approved for the intended purpose.

*Rulemaking Authority 633.104(1), 633.206(1)(b) FS. Law Implemented 633.104(4), 633.206 FS. History–New 5-1-84, Formerly 4A-42.04, Repromulgated 8-1-90, Formerly 4A-42.004, Amended 10-19-09.*

**69A-42.0041** **Fire Separation Requirements.**

No portion of a mobile home, excluding the tongue, shall be located closer than 10 ft. (3m) side to side, 8 ft. (2.4m) end to side, or 6 ft. (1.8m) end to end horizontally from any other mobile home or community building unless the exposed composite walls and roof of either structure are without opening and constructed of materials that will provide a one-hour fire resistance rating or the structures are separated by a one-hour fire-rated barrier.

*Rulemaking Authority 633.104(1), 633.206(1)(b) FS. Law Implemented 633.104(4), 633.206 FS. History–New 10-19-09.*

**69A-42.005** **Standards of the National Fire Protection Association Adopted.**

(1) National Fire Protection Association 501A, “Standard for Fire Safety Criteria for Manufactured Home Installations, Sites, and Communities,” and 1194, “Standard for Fire Safety Criteria for Recreational Vehicle Parks and Campgrounds,” adopted in rule 69A-3.012, F.A.C., shall be the governing standards, except as modified in this rule chapter.

(2) The codes and standards published by the National Fire Protection Association may be obtained by writing to the NFPA at: 1 Batterymarch Park, Quincy, Massachusetts 02169-7471. All standards adopted and incorporated by reference in this rule are also available for public inspection during regular business hours at the Bureau of Fire Prevention, Division of State Fire Marshal, Department of Financial Services, 325 John Knox Road, The Atrium, Third Floor, Tallahassee, Florida 32303.

*Rulemaking Authority 633.104(1), 633.206(1)(b) FS. Law Implemented 633.206 FS. History–New 5-1-84, Formerly 4A-42.05, Amended 8-1-90, 9-6-01, Formerly 4A-42.005, Amended 10-19-09.*
