**CHAPTER 69A-39**

**FIRESAFETY INSPECTOR CERTIFICATION**

69A-39.003	Types of Certification Available

69A-39.005	Firesafety Inspector and Fire Code Administrator Certification; Renewal or Reissuance of Certification

69A-39.007	Procedures for Certification Examination

69A-39.0071	Procedures for Fire Code Administrator Certification

69A-39.009	Renewal of Firesafety Inspector and Fire Code Administrator Certification (Repealed)

69A-39.010	Required Forms for Training and Certification of Firesafety Inspectors (Repealed)

**69A-39.003 Types of Certification Available.**

(1) Firesafety Inspector Certification. This certificate is issued to Firesafety Inspectors who successfully complete the Firesafety Inspector Training Course outlined in subsection 69A-39.005(1), F.A.C., and the certification examination prescribed by the Division of State Fire Marshal (Division). The levels of progression for a Firesafety Inspector Certification shall include Firesafety Inspector I, Firesafety Inspector II, and Firesafety Inspector III.

(2) Inservice Firesafety Inspector. Individuals who successfully complete the Inservice Firesafety Inspector Training Course outlined in subsection 69A-39.005(1), F.A.C., and who are certified pursuant to Section 633.216, F.S., shall be eligible to perform Inservice Firesafety Inspections. Individuals who are eligible to perform Inservice Firesafety Inspections shall be listed on a roster of those successfully completing the Inservice Firesafety Inspection Course. Said roster shall be maintained by the employing agency.

(3) Fire Code Administrator. This certificate is issued to individuals who meet the requirements set forth in subsection 69A-39.005(2), F.A.C.

*Rulemaking Authority 633.104, 633.216, 633.406(2) FS. Law Implemented 633.216, 633.406, 633.412 FS. History–New 11-21-83, Formerly 4A-39.03, Amended 8-2-88, 3-1-89, Formerly 4A-39.003, Amended 8-27-12, 3-17-21.*

**69A-39.005 Firesafety Inspector and Fire Code Administrator Certification; Renewal or Reissuance of Certification.**

(1) Firesafety Inspector Training Program. This training program is intended to prepare individuals to serve as an inservice firesafety inspector and firesafety inspector. This program is based on the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) 1031, Standard for Professional Qualifications for Fire Inspector and Plan Examiner (2014 Edition)<a name="_hlk865885"></a>. This program is intended to prepare individuals for service as firesafety inspectors serving in both the private and public sectors. The applicant may provide proof of equivalent education and training approved by the Bureau of Fire Standards and Training (Bureau) and meeting the criteria outlined under this subsection.

<a name="_hlk1130089"></a>(a) Inservice Firesafety Inspector. The inservice firesafety inspector must possess an active Firefighter Certificate of Compliance. The inservice firesafety inspector must perform duties under the supervision of an individual who holds an active Firesafety Inspector I, II, or III Certification. All activities of the inservice firesafety inspector must be approved by the authority having jurisdiction (AHJ). A quality assurance process based on the Florida Fire Prevention Code and local ordinance will be established by the AHJ, or designee who holds a current Firesafety Inspector I, II, or III Certification or Fire Code Administrator Certification, to review inspections reports and ensure compliance with state and local codes is maintained with this inspection process.

1\. Program Requirements. The individual must complete a minimum of 24 hours of training in the subject areas of: conducting inservice firesafety inspections, applicable fire prevention codes, fire prevention concepts, fire hazards, preparing inservice firesafety inspection reports, and customer service.

2\. Approved Training.

a. Training delivered by the fire service provider must be recorded in the Bureau’s database (https://myfloridacfo.com/Division/SFM/FCDICE/default.htm). The training record must include at a minimum: subject areas taught; names of students; dates of training; and hours of training.

b. The Bureau will approve and record completion of any training required under this paragraph (1)(a) when delivered by any provider other than the employing agency. Training is not valid until approved by the Bureau and recorded in the Bureau’s database. Requests for class offering approval must be electronically submitted at least 30 days prior to the first day of class using the Form DFS-K4-2167, Bureau’s Class Offering Request, which is incorporated by reference in subsection 69A-37.039(2), F.A.C., and can be obtained where indicated in subsection 69A-37.039(1), F.A.C. The provider must record in the Bureau’s database a final grade for each student within 14 calendar days after course completion. Students must complete each course with a grade of 70% or higher in order to meet the course requirement under this paragraph (1)(a). Alternative delivery techniques including online course delivery or blended learning must be approved by the Bureau.

3\. Instructor Qualifications. 

a. An instructor providing training by the employing agency must hold an active Firesafety Inspector I, II, or III Certification and an active Instructor I, II, or III Certification issued by the Bureau.

b. Any instructor providing training by any provider other than the employing agency must be qualified and approved by the Bureau prior to providing such training. The provider or instructor must electronically submit Form DFS-K4-2168, Instructor Approval Request, and Form DFS-K4-2167, Class Offering Request, which are incorporated by reference in subsection 69A-37.039(2), F.A.C., and can be obtained where indicated in subsection 69A-37.039(1), F.A.C., and be approved by the Bureau prior to the first day of the course. Qualified instructors are:

(I) Instructors with requisite faculty credentials for the academic institution that is registered in the Florida Department of Education Statewide Course Numbering System to teach the course; or

(II) Instructors who hold an active Instructor I, II, or III Certification issued by the Bureau and an active Firesafety Inspector I, II, or III Certification; or

(III) Instructors who hold an active Instructor I, II, or III Certification issued by the Bureau and an active Fire Code Administrator Certification.

(b) Firesafety Inspector I Certification. The Bureau will issue a Firesafety Inspector I Certificate of Compliance to an individual who meets the program requirements of paragraph (1)(b) and the qualifications for Firesafety Inspector set forth by the Bureau in Form DFS-K4-1023, Application for Firesafety Inspector Certification Examination, which is incorporated by reference in subsection 69A-37.039(2), F.A.C., and can be obtained where indicated in subsection 69A-37.039(1), F.A.C.

1\. Program Requirements. The individual must complete the courses required under this paragraph (1)(b) or courses determined by the Bureau to be equivalent. This program must consist of not less than 225 hours of training. Each course must be no less than 45 hours in duration. This program must consist of the following courses or those of equivalent interactive instruction, as approved by the Bureau: <a name="_hlk24116083"></a>Fire Prevention Practices; Private Fire Protection Systems I; Construction Documents and Plans Review; Codes and Standards; and Building Construction for the Fire Service.

2\. Approved Courses. The courses must be approved by the Bureau and meet the curriculum requirements of the program. The courses must be delivered by the Bureau, an approved education or training provider, a fire service provider, or a regionally or nationally accredited college or university as outlined in subsections 69A-37.084(5) and (6), F.A.C.

a. The providers must deliver the courses in paragraph (1)(b) using the applicable course syllabus listed below:

(I) Syllabus for Fire Prevention Practices (Rev. 10/19), which is hereby incorporated by reference and available at the following link: [http://www.flrules.org/Gateway/reference.asp?No=Ref-12891]();

(II) Syllabus for Private Fire Protection Systems I (Rev. 06/19), which is hereby incorporated by reference and available at the following link: [http://www.flrules.org/Gateway/reference.asp?No=Ref-12892](); 

(III) Syllabus for Construction Documents and Plans Review (Rev. 08/19), which is hereby incorporated by reference and available at the following link: [http://www.flrules.org/Gateway/reference.asp?No=Ref-12889]();

(IV) Syllabus for Codes and Standards (Rev. 11/19), which is hereby incorporated by reference and available at the following link: <a name="_hlt68701067"></a><a name="_hlt68701068"></a>[http://www.flrules.org/Gateway/reference.asp?No=Ref-12896](); and

(V)  Syllabus for Building Construction for the Fire Service (Rev. 06/19), which is hereby incorporated by reference and available at the following link: [http://www.flrules.org/Gateway/reference.asp?No=Ref-12888]().

Each of the above referenced syllabi is also available on the Bureau’s website: http://www.myfloridacfo.com/Division/SFM/BFST/Training/CourseSyllabi.htm.

b. Requests for class offering approval must be electronically submitted at least 30 days prior to the first day of class using Form DFS-K4-2167, Bureau’s Class Offering Request, which is incorporated by reference in subsection 69A-37.039(2), F.A.C., and can be obtained where indicated in subsection 69A-37.039(1), F.A.C.

c. The provider must record in the Bureau’s database (https://myfloridacfo.com/Division/SFM/FCDICE/default.htm) a final grade for each student within 14 calendar days after course completion. 

d. Students must complete the course with a grade of 70% or higher in order to meet the course requirement under this paragraph (1)(b).

e. The courses “Codes and Standards” and “Construction Documents and Plans Review” required under this paragraph (1)(b) will only be approved by the Bureau when taught in a traditional classroom delivery method.

f. The courses “Fire Prevention Practices,” “Private Fire Protection Systems I,” and “Building Construction for the Fire Service” required under this paragraph (1)(b) will be accepted by a provider using alternative delivery techniques including online course delivery or blended learning when first approved by the Bureau.

3\. Instructor Qualifications. An instructor providing training under this paragraph (1)(b) must be qualified and approved by the Bureau. All instructors must electronically submit Form DFS-K4-2168, Instructor Approval Request, which is incorporated by reference in subsection 69A-37.039(2), F.A.C., and can be obtained where indicated in subsection 69A-37.039(1), F.A.C., and be approved by the Bureau prior to the first day of the course. Qualified instructors are:

a. Instructors with requisite faculty credentials for the academic institution that is registered in the Florida Department of Education Statewide Course Numbering System to teach the course; or

b. Instructors who hold an active Instructor I, II, or III Certification issued by the Bureau and a Fire Officer I, II, III, or IV Certification; or

c. Instructors who hold an active Instructor I, II, or III Certification issued by the Bureau and an active Firesafety Inspector I, II, or III Certification; or

d. Instructors who hold an active Instructor I, II, or III Certification issued by the Bureau and an active Fire Code Administrator Certification.

4\. Requirements for Firesafety Inspector I Certificate of Compliance. The Bureau will issue a Firesafety Inspector I Certificate of Compliance when the individual:

a. Successfully completes all required course work;

b. Passes the Firesafety Inspector examination with a score of 70% or higher;

c. Submits a set of fingerprints to the Bureau with current processing fee; and

d. Submits the required Form DFS-K4-1023, Application for Firesafety Inspector Certification Examination, which is incorporated by reference in subsection 69A-37.039(2), F.A.C., and can be obtained where indicated in subsection 69A-37.039(1), F.A.C., with all supporting documentation and fees, to the Bureau.

(c) Firesafety Inspector II Certification. The Bureau will issue a Firesafety Inspector II Certification to an individual who holds a current Firesafety Inspector I Certificate of Compliance and meets the qualifications for Firesafety Inspector II set forth by the Bureau in Form <a name="_hlk504470551"></a>DFS-K4-2204, Firesafety Inspector II Task Book, which is incorporated by reference in subsection 69A-37.039(2), F.A.C., and can be obtained where indicated in subsection 69A-37.039(1), F.A.C.

1\. Program Requirements. The individual completing this program must successfully complete the Firesafety Inspector II Task Book and a minimum of 135 hours of instruction in the following courses: <a name="_hlk24116114"></a>Private Fire Protection Systems II; Fire Chemistry; and Ethical and Legal Issues for the Fire Service. Each course must be no less than 45 hours in duration.

2\. Approved Courses. The courses must be approved by the Bureau and meet the curriculum requirements of the program. The courses must be delivered by the Bureau, an education or training provider, a fire service provider, or a regionally or nationally accredited college or university as outlined in subsections 69A-37.084(5) and (6), F.A.C. The providers must deliver the courses in paragraph (1)(c) using the applicable course syllabus or curriculum listed below:

a. Syllabus for Private Fire Protection Systems II (Rev. 09/19), which is hereby incorporated by reference and available at the following link: [http://www.flrules.org/Gateway/reference.asp?No=Ref-12893](); and

b. Syllabus for Fire Chemistry (Rev. 10/19), which is hereby incorporated by reference and available at the following link: [http://www.flrules.org/Gateway/reference.asp?No=Ref-12890](); and

c. Ethical and Legal Issues for the Fire Service Course Curriculum (Rev. 04/18), which is hereby incorporated by reference and available at the following link: [http://www.flrules.org/Gateway/reference.asp?No=Ref-12898]().

Each of the above referenced syllabi is also available on the Bureau’s website: http://www.myfloridacfo.com/Division/SFM/BFST/Training/CourseSyllabi.htm.

3\. Instructor Qualifications. An instructor providing training under this paragraph (1)(c) must be qualified and approved by the Bureau. All instructors must electroncially submit Form DFS-K4-2168, Instructor Approval Request, which is incorporated by reference in subsection 69A-37.039(2), F.A.C., <a name="_hlk504470941"></a>and can be obtained where indicated in subsection 69A-37.039(1), F.A.C., and be approved by the Bureau prior to the first day of the course. Qualified instructors are:

a. Instructors with requisite faculty credentials for the academic institution that is registered in the Florida Department of Education Statewide Course Numbering System to teach the course; or

b. Instructors who hold an active Instructor I, II, or III Certification issued by the Bureau and Fire Officer II, III, or IV Certification; or 

c. Instructors who hold an active Instructor I, II, or III Certification issued by the Bureau and an active Firesafety Inspector II or III Certification; or

d. Instructors who hold an active Instructor I, II, or III Certification issued by the Bureau and an active Fire Code Administrator Certification.

(d) Firesafety Inspector III Certification.

1\. The Bureau will issue a Firesafety Inspector III Certification to an individual who holds a current Firesafety Inspector II Certification and meets the qualifications for Firesafety Inspector III set forth by the Bureau in Form <a name="_hlk504470676"></a>DFS-K4-2205, Application for Firesafety Inspector III Certification, which is incorporated by reference in subsection 69A-37.039(2), F.A.C., and can be obtained where indicated in subsection 69A-37.039(1), F.A.C.

2\. Program Requirements. 

a. The individual must possess an associate’s degree or higher and document at least six (6) years of experience as a full-time Firesafety Inspector;

b. The individual must complete the course “Evaluating Performance-Based Designs;” and

c. The individual must hold certification as a “Certified Fire Protection Specialist” (CFPS) with the NFPA.

(2) Fire Code Administrator Certification. This training program is intended to prepare individuals to serve as a fire code administrator. This program is based on the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) 1037, Standard for Professional Qualifications for Fire Marshal (2016 Edition). The applicant may provide proof of equivalent education and training approved by the Bureau and meeting the criteria outlined under this subsection. The Bureau will issue a Fire Code Administrator Certificate to an individual who meets the program requirements of paragraph (1)(d) and the following:

(a) Program Requirements. The individual must complete the courses required under this subsection (2) or courses determined by the Bureau to be equivalent. This program must consist of not less than 270 hours of training. Each course must be no less than 45 hours in duration. This program must consist of the following courses or those of equivalent interactive instruction, as approved by the Bureau: <a name="_hlk24116136"></a>Community Risk Reduction; Chief Officer; Personnel Management for the Fire and Emergency Service; Fire Prevention Organization and Management; Analytical Approaches to Public Fire Protection; and  Ethical and Legal Issues for the Fire Service.

(b) Approved Courses. The courses must be approved by the Bureau and meet the curriculum requirements of the program. The courses must be delivered by the Bureau, an education or training provider, a fire service provider, or a regionally or nationally accredited college or university as outlined in subsections 69A-37.084(5) and (6), F.A.C.

1\. The providers must deliver the courses in paragraph (2)(a) using the applicable course curriculum listed below:

a. Community Risk Reduction Course Curriculum (Rev. 05/18), which is hereby incorporated by reference and available at the following link: [http://www.flrules.org/Gateway/reference.asp?No=Ref-12897]();

b. Chief Officer Course Curriculum (Rev. 08/18), which is hereby incorporated by reference and available at the following link: [http://www.flrules.org/Gateway/reference.asp?No=Ref-12895]();

c. Personnel Management for the Fire and Emergency Services Course Curriculum (Rev. 06/18), which is hereby incorporated by reference and available at the following link: [http://www.flrules.org/Gateway/reference.asp?No=Ref-12900]();

d. Fire Prevention Organization and Management Course Curriculum (Rev. 04/18), which is hereby incorporated by reference and available at the following link: [http://www.flrules.org/Gateway/reference.asp?No=Ref-12899](); 

e. Analytical Approaches to Public Fire Protection Course Curriculum (Rev. 09/18), which is hereby incorporated by reference and available at the following link: [http://www.flrules.org/Gateway/reference.asp?No=Ref-12894](); and

f. Ethical and Legal Issues for the Fire Service Course Curriculum (Rev. 04/18), which is hereby incorporated by reference and available at the following link: [http://www.flrules.org/Gateway/reference.asp?No=Ref-12898]().

Each of the above referenced syllabi is also available on the Bureau’s website: http://www.myfloridacfo.com/Division/SFM/BFST/Training/CourseSyllabi.htm.

2\. Requests for class offering approval must be electronically submitted at least 30 days prior to the first day of class using Form DFS-K4-2167, Bureau’s Class Offering Request, which is incorporated by reference in subsection 69A-37.039(2), F.A.C., and can be obtained where indicated in subsection 69A-37.039(1), F.A.C.

3\. The provider must record in the Bureau’s database (https://myfloridacfo.com/Division/SFM/FCDICE/default.htm) a final grade for each student within 14 calendar days after course completion.

4\. Students must complete the course with a grade of 70% or higher in order to meet the course requirement under this subsection (2). 

5\. The courses required under this subsection (2) will be accepted by a provider using alternative delivery techniques including online course delivery or blended learning when first approved by the Bureau.

(c) Instructor Qualifications. An instructor providing training under this subsection (2) must be qualified and approved by the Bureau. All instructors must electronically submit Form DFS-K4-2168, Instructor Approval Request, which is incorporated by reference in subsection 69A-37.039(2), F.A.C., and can be obtained where indicated in subsection 69A-37.039(1), F.A.C., and be approved by the Bureau prior to the first day of the course. Qualified instructors are:

1\. Instructors with requisite faculty credentials for the academic institution that is registered in the Florida Department of Education Statewide Course Numbering System to teach the course; or

2\. Instructors who hold an active Fire Code Administrator Certification issued by the  Bureau and hold an active Instructor I, II, or III Certification issued by the Bureau. 

(d) Requirements for Fire Code Administrator Certificate. The Bureau will issue a Fire Code Administrator Certificate when the individual:

1\. Successfully completes all required course work;

2\. Possesses an active Firesafety Inspector III Certificate issued by the Bureau; 

3\. Submits the required Form DFS-K4-2085, Application for Fire Code Administrator Certification, which is incorporated by reference in subsection 69A-37.039(2), F.A.C., and can be obtained where indicated in subsection 69A-37.039(1), F.A.C., with all supporting documentation and fees, to the Bureau; and

4\. Has at least: 

a. Six (6) years of full-time working as a certified Firesafety Inspector and who successfully completes the advanced training for fire prevention management and code enforcement outlined in subsection 69A-39.005(2), F.A.C.; or

b. Ten (10) years of documented full-time employment working as a certified Firesafety Inspector combined with at least five (5) years of full-time equivalent management experience that includes analytical approaches to fire protection, fire service administration, fire prevention management, community risk reduction, and human resource management. The applicant shall include dates of employment on Form DFS-K4-2085 and attach a copy of job description or attach a letter of attestation from the individual’s employer with dates of employment and description of job duties.

(3) Courses submitted for equivalency under subsection (1) or (2) will be reviewed by the Bureau. The Bureau will approve any course in subsection (1) or (2) which meets the criteria provided in this subsection. Requests for approval must be submitted in writing to the Bureau, 11655 N.W. Gainesville Road, Ocala, Florida 34482-1486. The following factors will be used to determine course equivalency: course title, course grade or record of course completion, number of academic credits earned, course hours attended, course description, course syllabus, student learning outcomes, and course objectives. All requests for course equivalency shall include, at a minimum:

(a) Name of course;

(b) Passage scores and rates;

(c) Required number of classroom hours; and

(d) Description of the course objectives, student learning outcomes, or job performance requirements covered.

(4) Any Firesafety Inspector I Certificate of Compliance, Firesafety Inspector II Certification, or Fire Code Administrator Certification issued prior to May 10, 2021 remains active. 

(5) Renewal or Reissuance of Firesafety Inspector and Fire Code Administrator Certification.

(a)1. A Firesafety Inspector and Fire Code Administrator Certification, unless renewed, expires four (4) years after the issuance, reissuance, or last renewal date of the certificate, whichever date is later. Certification as a Fire Code Administrator or reissuance or renewal of that certification shall also renew the Firesafety Inspector I, II, or III Certification required by Rule 69A-39.005, F.A.C.

2\. To renew a Firesafety Inspector I, II, or III Certification or Fire Code Administrator Certification, an applicant must:

a. Successfully complete, during the four-year period before the certificate’s expiration date, at least 54 hours of continuing education in courses, workshops, or seminars approved by the Bureau, which relate to fire prevention, code enforcement, fire protection, fire dynamics, building construction, plan review, public education, leadership, fire prevention management, community risk reduction, ethics, fire investigation, or other areas related to fire prevention. 

b. Submit, before the certificate’s expiration date, Form DFS-K4-1463, Certification Renewal Application (Inspector/Instructor), which is incorporated by reference in subsection 69A-37.039(2), F.A.C., and can be obtained where indicated in subsection 69A-37.039(1), F.A.C., to the Bureau. The form must be fully completed and must verify successful completion of the requirements set forth in sub-subparagraph 69A-37.039(5)(a)2.a., F.A.C. Acceptable forms of verification include copies of certificates or certified college transcripts and records of course completion maintained in the Bureau’s database for continuing education.

(b)1. A Firesafety Inspector Certification that has lapsed may be reissued by the Bureau if the applicant:

a. Successfully recompletes the training courses as set forth in paragraph (1)(b), (c), or (d) of this rule that are applicable to the Firesafety Inspector Certification being sought for reissuance and attains a passing score on the certification examination (if a passing score is not re-attained, the provisions of Section 633.216(4), F.S., shall govern the retaking of the examination); 

b. Submits a set of fingerprints to the Bureau with the current processing fee; and

c. Submits a completed application form referenced in paragraph (1)(b), (c), or (d) of this rule that is applicable to the Firesafety Inspector Certification being sought for reissuance to the Bureau with all supporting documentation and fees.

2\. Any person whose certification has expired shall not function as a Firesafety Inspector.

(c) A Fire Code Administrator Certification that has lapsed may be reissued by the Bureau if the applicant:

1\. Submits a set of fingerprints to the Bureau with the current processing fee; and

2\. Submits a completed application form referenced in paragraph (2)(d) of this rule with all supporting documentation and fees.

(d) It is the responsibility of the certified Firesafety Inspector or Fire Code Administrator to notify the Bureau of any address changes in writing or by updating his or her personal profile online at https://floridastatefirecollege.org/.

*Rulemaking Authority 633.104, 633.216, 633.406 FS. Law Implemented 633.128, 633.132, 633.216, 633.406, 633.412 FS. History–New 11-21-83, Formerly 4A-39.05, Amended 8-2-88, 3-1-89, 10-23-90, 12-10-01, Formerly 4A-39.005, Amended 8-27-12, 5-10-21.*

**69A-39.007 Procedures for Certification Examination.**

(1) To receive Firesafety Inspector Certification from the Division, a score of 70 percent must be achieved on a certification examination administered by the Division. To be eligible for the examination, the applicant must submit Form DFS-K4-1023, “Application for Firesafety I Inspector Certification Examination,” which is incorporated by reference in subsection 69A-37.039(2), F.A.C., and can be obtained where indicated in subsection 69A-37.039(1), F.A.C., to the Bureau of Fire Standards and Training within the Division (hereinafter referred to as the “Bureau”). The Division shall notify the applicant in writing of its determination regarding the application. If the application is:

(a) Approved, the applicant may contact the Bureau to schedule the certification examination or may register for the examination online at https://floridastatefirecollege.org/. The examination must be completed by the applicant at a location designated by the Bureau within 180 days after the date on the written notice indicating application approval.

(b) Denied, the notice shall state the reason(s) therefore and shall be a agency action subject to review under section 120.57, F.S.

(2) Upon completion of the certification examination, the applicant shall be notified in writing of the result. If the applicant:

(a) Passes the examination, the certificate will be issued and mailed to the applicant’s address on the application form.

(b) Fails the examination, he or she may contact the Bureau to schedule a retake of the certification examination or may register for the retake examination online at https://floridastatefirecollege.org/. The retake examination must be completed by the applicant at a location designated by the Bureau within 180 days after the date on the written notice indicating the applicant’s examination score. If, after retaking the examination, the applicant has not achieved the minimum passing score, he or she will be required to retake the Firesafety Inspector Training Course outlined in subsection 69A-39.005(1), F.A.C., before another examination will be administered.

*Rulemaking Authority 633.104, 633.216(9) FS. Law Implemented 633.216 FS. History–New 11-21-83, Formerly 4A-39.07, Amended 8-2-88, 3-1-89, 12-10-01, Formerly 4A-39.007, Amended 8-27-12.*

**69A-39.0071 Procedures for Fire Code Administrator Certification.**

Applicants for certification as a Fire Code Administrator shall submit Form DFS-K4-2085, “Application for Fire Code Administrator Certification,” which is incorporated by reference in subsection 69A-37.039(2), F.A.C., and can be obtained where indicated in subsection 69A-37.039(1), F.A.C. The form shall be submitted to the Bureau of Fire Standards and Training within the Division with a professional portfolio that documents compliance with each requirement in paragraph 69A-39.003(3)(a), F.A.C. If the applicant documents compliance, the Division shall issue the certificate. If the applicant fails to document compliance, the Division shall issue a written notice of denial to the applicant, which specifies the reason(s) therefore and which shall be agency action subject to review under section 120.57, F.S.

*Rulemaking Authority 633.104, 633.216(8) FS. Law Implemented 633.216 FS. History–New 8-27-12, Amended 8-20-13.*

**69A-39.009 Renewal of Firesafety Inspector and Fire Code Administrator Certification.**

*Rulemaking Authority 633.104(3) FS. Law Implemented 633.216 FS. History–New 11-21-83, Formerly 4A-39.09, Amended 8-2-88, 3-1-89, Formerly 4A-39.009, Amended 8-27-12, 2-18-16, Repealed 5-10-21.*

**69A-39.010 Required Forms for Training and Certification of Firesafety Inspectors.**

*Rulemaking Authority 633.104 FS. Law Implemented 633.216 FS. History–New 11-21-83, Formerly 4A-39.10, Amended 8-2-88, 3-1-89, 12-10-01, Formerly 4A-39.010, Repealed 8-27-12.*
