**CHAPTER 69A-52**

**FEES RULE CHAPTER**

69A-52.001 	Title (Repealed)

69A-52.002 	Purpose and Scope

69A-52.003 	State Fire Marshal Responsibilities for State Buildings and Premises; Plans Review and Building Site Inspections

69A-52.004 	Fees

**69A-52.001 Title.**

*Rulemaking Authority 633.104, 633.218(5) FS. Law Implemented 633.218(5) FS. History–New 6-18-91, Formerly 4A-52.001, Repealed 4-23-23.*

**69A-52.002 Purpose and Scope.**

Pursuant to Section 633.218(5), F.S., the following rules are adopted covering the schedule of fees charged for the costs of inspection and related administrative expenses incurred by the Division of State Fire Marshal. The fees shall be established at a level which will recover the costs which the State Fire Marshal incurs in fulfilling its legislative mandates.

*Rulemaking Authority 633.104, 633.218(5) FS. Law Implemented 633.218(5) FS. History–New 6-18-91, Formerly 4A-52.002.*

**69A-52.003** **State Fire Marshal Responsibilities for State Buildings and Premises; Plans Review and Building Site Inspections.**

(1) The State Fire Marshal shall perform a review of plans pursuant to section 633.218, F.S., and perform inspections in accordance with Rule 69A-3.011, F.A.C., for the fees established by Rule 69A-52.004, F.A.C.

(2) A request to review plans pursuant to section 633.218, F.S., must be submitted electronically on Form DFS-K3-1973, “Bureau of Fire Prevention Online Portal – Plans Review,” eff. 03/22, which is incorporated by reference and is available through the online portal for The Bureau of Fire Prevention Plans Review Section at https://www.citizenserve.com/120/CAPFor120 and at <https://flrules.org/Gateway/reference.asp?No=Ref-14082>. A request for plans review may also be submitted on the Form DFS-K3-1973, “Bureau of Fire Prevention Oneline Portal – Plans Review,” by mailing the form to 200 East Gaines Street, Tallahassee, Florida 32399, ATTN: State Fire Marshal Plans Review Unit.

(3) A request for a building site inspection must be submitted on Form DFS-K3-1528, “Request for Building Site Inspection,” eff. 03/22, which is incorporated by reference and available at <https://www.flrules.org/Gateway/reference.asp?No=Ref-14083>, and https://www.myfloridacfo.com/division/sfm/bfst/Documents/DSFMFORMS.pdf.

*Rulemaking Authority 633.104, 633.218 FS. Law Implemented 633.218 FS. History–New 6-18-91, Amended 9-6-01, Formerly 4A-52.003, Amended 11-22-09, 4-26-22.*

**69A-52.004 Fees.**

(1) Review of plans for all new construction, renovations, alterations, or changes of occupancy.

(a)1. The plans review fee for all new construction, renovations, alterations, or changes of occupancy for state-owned and state-leased buildings will be computed by multiplying the estimated cost of construction by .0025.

2\. If no construction cost is involved in a change of occupancy, the plans review fee will be calculated at the rate of $.02 per square foot of newly occupied space.

3\. The minimum fee for each plan review is $100 per building.

(b) The plans review fees set forth in paragraph (1)(a) of this rule, include inspections or site visits on construction projects or new buildings to verify compliance with the Florida Fire Prevention Code and construction requirements.

(c) Plans review fees must be paid in full by the lessor, design professional, or state agency within 90 calendar days of completion of the plans review. 

(2) Firesafety inspections on construction projects or new buildings.

(a) The State Fire Marshal or his or her designee shall be the final authority as to when the building meets firesafety standards for occupancy or completion.

(b) If a firesafety inspection reveals a violation of the Florida Fire Prevention Code, additional inspections will be required until the violation is resolved. Additional inspections required after an initial re-inspection of the same violation or a failed inspection on the same inspection item shall be billed at the rate of $65 per hour, per inspector (portal to portal), plus expenses.

(3) Firesafety inspections on existing buildings.

(a) The fee for recurring or annual firesafety inspections for state-owned buildings is computed by multiplying the total value of all of the state agency’s buildings, as reported by the Division of Risk Management for coverage in the state’s property self-insurance program, by .0002. The minimum fee for each inspection is $100.

(b)1. The Division of State Fire Marshal will bill annual fire inspection fees by September 1 of each year.

2\. The bill for inspection fees sent to a state agency will cover fees for all space owned by that agency.

3\. These fees may be paid in equal installments on September 1, December 1, March 1, and June 1 of each fiscal year.

4\. All firesafety inspection fees are payable to “Department of Financial Services”.

(c) If a firesafety inspection reveals a violation of the Florida Fire Prevention Code, additional inspections will be required until the violation is resolved. Additional inspections required after an initial re-inspection of the same violation shall be billed at the rate of $65 per hour, per inspector (portal to portal), plus expenses.

(4) All fees owed pursuant to this Rule are payable to “Department of Financial Services.”

*Rulemaking Authority 633.104, 633.218 FS. Law Implemented 633.104, 633.218 FS. History–New 6-18-91, Amended 10-20-93, 9-6-01, Formerly 4A-52.004, Amended 4-26-22.*
