**CHAPTER 69A-66**

**FLORIDA FIRE INCIDENT REPORTING SYSTEM**

69A-66.001	Florida Fire Incident Reporting System (FFIRS), in General

69A-66.002	Definitions

69A-66.003	Training

69A-66.004	Submission of Fire Incident Data

69A-66.005	Submission Deadlines for Fire Incident Data

69A-66.006	Reporting

69A-66.007	Fire Department Identification (FDID) Number

69A-66.008	Form to Obtain FDID Number

**69A-66.001 Florida Fire Incident Reporting System (FFIRS), in General.**

(1) The purpose of these rules is to establish standards and procedures for fire protection agency reporting of fire incidents to the Division of State Fire Marshal.

(2) The standards and procedures contained in these rules apply to the Division of State Fire Marshal and to each fire protection agency in the State of Florida participating in the Florida Fire Incident Reporting System (FFIRS) program.

(3) The Division of State Fire Marshal manages FFIRS, which is a means for fire protection agencies to report and maintain computerized records of fires and other fire protection agency incidents in a uniform manner. FFIRS is operated in conjunction with the National Fire Incident Reporting System (NFIRS). By participating in the FFIRS program, fire protection agencies become a part of the cooperative effort among fire organizations to make Florida a safer state.

(4) These rules are minimum requirements and do not preclude a fire protection agency from implementing its own requirements which shall not conflict with these rules.

*Rulemaking Authority 633.104, 633.136 FS. Law Implemented 633.136 FS. History–New 2-8-06.*

**69A-66.002 Definitions.** 

For purposes of these rules unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the following word or term has the following meaning.

(1) “Florida Fire Incident Reporting System,” or “FFIRS,” means the Florida statewide fire data information system that resides within the Division of State Fire Marshal, Department of Financial Services. FFIRS works in collaboration with NFIRS to report and analyze fire incidents.

(2) “National Fire Incident Reporting System,” or “NFIRS,” means an information system initiated and supported by the United States Fire Administration (USFA). NFIRS was developed as a means to gather and analyze information on the magnitude of the nation’s fire problem, as well as its detailed characteristics and trends.

(3) “Codes” means a series of basic phrases with code numbers used to describe fire incidents in the NFIRS/FFIRS program. The descriptive phrases were developed and made available by the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) Standard 901, the Uniform Coding for Fire Protection, 1976 edition, the 1981 codes for Fire Service Casualty Reporting, and the 1990 codes for Hazardous Materials Reporting. The National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) Standard 901, The Uniform Coding for Fire Protection, 1976 edition, the 1981 codes for Fire Service Casualty Reporting, and the 1990 codes for Hazardous Materials Reporting are not adopted in these rules, but are provided for reference and informational purposes only.

(4) “Codes Training” means instruction on the series of basic phrases with code numbers that are used to describe fire-related incidents in NFIRS/FFIRS.

(5) “Federal Client Tool” means software provided free to fire protection agencies throughout the United States to manage fire data. The USFA, in partnership with the National Fire Information Council (NFIC), developed the software.

(6) “Third Party Vendor Software” is NFIRS/FFIRS compatible software that is marketed and sold to fire protection agencies by private vendors.

(7) “Fire Protection Agency” means any local, state, state agency, or special fire department in the state responsible for municipal or county fire protection as recognized by the appropriate municipal, county, or special fire control district or the state. A fire protection agency has the same intent and purpose as a fire department as defined in subsection 69A-62.001(4), F.A.C., or fire district, which is of carrying out the duties, functions, powers, and responsibilities normally associated with a fire department. These duties, functions, powers, and responsibilities include but are not limited to the protection and saving of life and property against fire, explosions, and other hazards, the prevention and extinguishment of fires, and the enforcement of municipal, county, and state fire prevention codes, as well as of any law pertaining to the prevention and control of fires and hazardous materials incident mitigation.

*Rulemaking Authority 633.104, 633.136 FS. Law Implemented 633.136 FS. History–New 2-8-06, Amended 5-14-15.*

**69A-66.003 Training.**

(1) Federal Client Tool Training is instruction on data entry, reporting, analysis, maintenance, and the submission of fire incident information. The training is coordinated and presented by the FFIRS Section to fire protection agency personnel.

(2) Fire protection agencies may contact the FFIRS Section at FFIRS@MyFloridaCFO.com or call the FFIRS Section at (850)413-3698 to request a training class.

*Rulemaking Authority 633.104, 633.136 FS. Law Implemented 633.136 FS. History–New 2-8-06, Amended 5-14-15.*

**69A-66.004 Submission of Fire Incident Data.**

Data may be submitted to the FFIRS Section using the following methods:

(1) Fire protection agencies using the Federal Client Tool in an online capacity must enter and save their data from their agency’s personal computers directly into the NFIRS database. Fire protection agencies using the Federal Client Tool in an off-line capacity must enter and save their data on their agency’s personal computers but must forward it to the FFIRS Section by emailing the report as an attachment to FFIRS@MyFloridaCFO.com, or saving it to a compact disk or diskette and mailing it to the FFIRS Section for the data to be imported into the NFIRS database.

(2) Fire protection agencies using third party vendor software must enter the data directly into their agency’s computers using this software. For the data to be imported to the NFIRS database, the reports must be either emailed as an attachment to FFIRS@MyFloridaCFO.com, or saved to a compact disk or diskette and mailed to the FFIRS Section.

(3) Annual Summaries are a standardized form which may be completed and forwarded to the FFIRS Section by fire protection agencies. The use of Summaries is discouraged because the summary does not give specific fire related data and also because it does not comply with Federal Grant responsibilities or allow for entry into the NFIRS database.

*Rulemaking Authority 633.104, 633.136 FS. Law Implemented 633.136 FS. History–New 2-8-06, Amended 5-14-15.*

**69A-66.005 Submission Deadlines for Fire Incident Data.**

(1) Each fire protection agency shall submit their data on a monthly basis. Fire incident data is due by the 15th of the following month. For example, January fire incident data is due by February 15.

(2) To be included in the annual report of fire and non-fire incidents, yearly data must be submitted from fire protection agencies by April 30 of each year.

*Rulemaking Authority 633.104, 633.136 FS. Law Implemented 633.136 FS. History–New 2-8-06.*

**69A-66.006 Reporting.**

(1) The State Fire Marshal’s Annual Report, “Florida Fires,” is developed from the compiled fire data submitted by Florida fire protection agencies. It is available via the Internet at www.FFIRS@MyFloridaCFO.com, or it may be obtained by contacting the FFIRS Section in care of the Division of State Fire Marshal, 200 East Gaines Street, Tallahassee, Florida 32399-0340.

(2) Web Based Reports. All Florida fire protection agencies participating in the FFIRS program are able to generate statistical reports via the internet at www.nfirs.fema.gov.

(3) Requested Reports. Florida fire protection agencies are permitted to request statistical reports from the FFIRS Section.

*Rulemaking Authority 633.104, 633.136 FS. Law Implemented 633.136 FS. History–New 2-8-06.*

**69A-66.007 Fire Department Identification (FDID) Number.**

(1) The Fire Department Identification Number, or FDID number, is a unique five-digit identifier assigned by the FFIRS Section to identify a particular fire protection agency within the state. This identifier may also identify the county, fire district, or other jurisdiction in which the fire protection agency is located.

(2) The purpose of the FDID number is to identify incident data collected and reported by individual protection agencies. Feedback on local or regional incident experience can then be prepared and sent to an individual agency or a specific fire protection agency.

*Rulemaking Authority 633.104, 633.136 FS. Law Implemented 633.136 FS. History–New 2-8-06.*

**69A-66.008 Form to Obtain FDID Number.**

(1) A Fire Department Identification (FDID) number shall be assigned to a fire protection agency by the Division upon compliance with the following:

(a) Submission of Form DFS-K0-2147, “Fire Department FDID Issuance/Update,” (Effective 3/2015) [http://www.flrules.org/Gateway/reference.asp?No=Ref-05318](), which is hereby incorporated by reference.

(b) Successful completion of a Safety Compliance Inspection conducted by the Bureau of Fire Standards and Training in accordance with sections 633.501-.536, F.S., the Florida Firefighters Occupational Safety and Health Act.

(2) The forms adopted in subsection (1) can be obtained by contacting the FFIRS Section, Division of State Fire Marshal, 200 East Gaines Street, Tallahassee, Florida 32399-0340, phone: (850)413-3698 or email FFIRS@MyFloridaCFO.com.

*Rulemaking Authority 633.104, 633.136 FS. Law Implemented 633.136 FS. History–New 2-8-06, Amended 5-14-15.*
