**CHAPTER 69A-58** 

**UNIFORM FIRESAFETY STANDARDS FOR EDUCATIONAL FACILITIES**

69A-58.001	Administration and General Requirements

69A-58.002	Scope: New Construction and Existing Facilities

69A-58.003	Definitions

69A-58.0031	New Construction of Educational Facilities

69A-58.004	Firesafety Inspections

69A-58.0041 	Charter Schools

69A-58.005	Serious Life Safety Hazards

69A-58.006	Vacant and Abandoned Buildings

69A-58.007	Counties, Municipalities, and Special Districts Having Firesafety Responsibilities, Without Firesafety Inspectors

69A-58.008	Standards and Requirements for Existing Buildings; Additions to Rule Chapter 69A-60, the Florida Fire 	Prevention Code
# 69A-58.0081	Means of Egress
69A-58.0082	Relocatable Buildings

69A-58.0083	Protection from Hazards

69A-58.0084	Seclusion Time-Out Rooms

69A-58.009	Florida Firesafety School Evaluation System

69A-58.010	Other Applicable Codes and Standards (Repealed)

**69A-58.001 Administration and General Requirements.** 

The Division of State Fire Marshal in consultation with the Department of Education hereby adopts firesafety rules for use by board fire officials and local fire officials when conducting plans reviews for new construction and firesafety inspections of new construction and existing buildings located in educational facilities, educational plants, ancillary plants, and auxiliary facilities to ensure the safety of occupants.

*Rulemaking Authority 633.104(1), (7), 1013.12(1) FS. Law Implemented 633.104(7), 633.206, 633.208, 1013.12, 1013.371, 1013.38 FS. History–New 2-18-03, Formerly 4A-58.001, Amended 11-26-06, 11-4-12.*

**69A-58.002 Scope: New Construction and Existing Facilities.**

(1) This rule chapter establishes uniform requirements to provide a reasonable degree of safety from fire in new construction and existing buildings located in educational facilities, educational plants, ancillary plants, and auxiliary facilities under the jurisdiction of a district school board or a public college board of trustees.

(2) This rule chapter includes procedures for withdrawal of sites and facilities from use until unsafe conditions are corrected.

(3) Section 1002.33(1), F.S., states, “All charter schools in Florida are public schools.” Charter schools shall utilize facilities that comply with the firesafety provisions specified within its charter, or if the charter does not address specific firesafety provisions, the charter school shall utilize facilities that comply with the Florida Fire Prevention Code, the edition as adopted in rule chapter 69A-60, F.A.C., pursuant to section 1002.33(18), F.S.

(a) All charter schools are subject to the inspection requirements of rule 69A-58.0041, F.A.C.

(b) Each board shall conduct or cause to be conducted each inspection required by paragraph 69A-58.004(1)(a), F.A.C., and the reporting requirements of paragraph 69A-58.004(6)(a), F.A.C.

(4) Existing educational and ancillary facilities shall comply with the applicable provisions of NFPA 1 and NFPA 101, the Florida editions adopted in rule 69A-3.012, F.A.C., except as modified by chapter 1013, F.S., and this rule chapter.

(5) Any time NFPA 1 or NFPA 101 refers to any other NFPA standard that has not been adopted by the Division of State Fire Marshal in this rule chapter, the referenced standard shall be the Florida edition adopted in rule 69A-3.012, F.A.C.

(6) Public colleges shall comply with the applicable chapters of NFPA 1 and NFPA 101, the Florida editions adopted in Rule 69A-3.012, F.A.C., in accordance with the following:

(a) Instructional buildings, classrooms with a capacity of fewer than fifty (50) persons, and instructional laboratories are classified as a business occupancy.

(b) Classrooms with a capacity of fifty (50) persons or more are classified as an assembly occupancy.

(c) Non-instructional laboratories are classified as an industrial occupancy.

(7) Nothing contained in these rules prohibits a county, municipality, or independent special fire control district having firesafety responsibility and a district school board or public college board of trustees from entering into an agreement or an understanding which governs inspections, reviews, and approvals of new construction in the subject jurisdiction.

(8) In the event of a conflict between the local fire official and the board fire official on the requirement or interpretation of any provision of this rule chapter or rule chapter 69A-60, F.A.C., the Florida Fire Prevention Code, the conflict shall be resolved by agreement between the local fire official and the board fire official in favor of the requirement or interpretation of the code which offers the greatest degree of life safety or alternatives which would provide an equivalent degree of life safety and an equivalent method of construction.

(9) If the local fire official and the board fire official are unable to agree on which requirement, interpretation, or system provides the highest degree of life safety or alternatives which would provide an equivalent degree of life safety and an equivalent method of construction, either official may petition the division for a declaratory statement in accordance with section 120.565, F.S., and any rules applicable thereto, setting forth each one’s positions and reasons therefore. If both the board fire official and the local fire official choose to file a petition, a joint petition should be filed. The division will make every effort to expedite the process of issuing a declaratory statement commensurate, however, with the time and publication requirements of chapter 120, F.S.

(10) The local fire official and the board fire official are permitted to seek an informal nonbinding interpretation pursuant to rule 69A-60.011, F.A.C.  If such an informal opinion is requested, the request shall be given the highest priority by the Florida Fire Prevention Code Interpretations Committee and every effort shall be made to expedite a response.

*Rulemaking Authority 633.104(1), (7), 1013.12(1) FS. Law Implemented 633.104(7), 633.202(13), 633.206, 633.208, 1002.33(18), 1013.12, 1013.371, 1013.38 FS. History–New 2-18-03, Formerly 4A-58.002, Amended 11-26-06, 11-4-12.*

**69A-58.003 Definitions.**

As used in this rule chapter, the following definitions apply:

(1) “Ancillary plant” is comprised of the building, site, and site improvements necessary to provide such facilities as vehicle maintenance, warehouses, maintenance, or administrative buildings necessary to provide support services to an educational program.

(2) “Auxiliary facility” means the spaces located at educational plants which are not designed for student occupant stations.

(3) “Board” means the district school board or public college board of trustees with jurisdiction to make inspections of buildings and to enforce the firesafety codes, as required by these rules, which establish standards for design, construction, erection, alteration, repair, modification, or demolition of school district and public college buildings, structures or facilities.

(4) “Board fire official” means the firesafety inspector certified pursuant to section 633.216(2), F.S., who is appointed by the board under section 1013.371(2), F.S.

(5) “Building” or “board building” means any building or structure located on, upon, or in any educational facility, educational plant, ancillary plant, or auxiliary facility owned, rented, leased, or under lease-purchase agreement or lease-purchase option with a board. These terms include any permanent, fixed, relocatable, and manufactured building or structure.

(6) “Division,” including the lower case “division,” means the Division of State Fire Marshal of the Department of Financial Services.

(7) “Educational facilities” means the buildings and equipment, structures, and special educational use areas that are built, installed, or established to serve primarily the educational purposes and secondarily the social and recreational purposes of the community and which may lawfully be used as authorized by the Florida Statutes and approved by the boards. As used in these rules and unless otherwise clearly indicated by the context, “educational facilities” includes each educational facility, educational plant, ancillary plant, and auxiliary facility and all buildings and structures contained therein and thereon.

(8) “Educational plant” comprises the educational facilities, site and site improvements necessary to accommodate students, faculty, administrators, staff, and the activities of the education program of each plant.

(9) “Existing” facility means a facility or building that has been issued a certificate of occupancy prior to the effective date of this edition of this rule chapter.

(10) “Florida Building Code” means the Florida Building Code as adopted in Rule 61G20-1.001, F.A.C., adopted pursuant to section 552.73, F.S.

(11) “FISH” means Florida Inventory of School Houses.

(12) “Florida Fire Prevention Code” means the Florida Fire Prevention Code as adopted in rule 69A-3.012, F.A.C.

(13) “Independent special fire control district” means an independent special district as defined in section 191.003(5), F.S., that was created for the purposes of fire prevention, fire suppression, or fire protection.

(14) “Local fire official” means the county, municipality or independent special fire control district having firesafety responsibility employing or contracting with a firesafety inspector certified pursuant to section 633.216(2), F.S., with jurisdiction to make inspections of buildings and to enforce the firesafety codes which establish standards for design, construction, erection, alteration, repair, modification, or demolition of public or private buildings, structures, or facilities or, where the context requires, the State Fire Marshal, as referred to in section 1013.12(3)(b), F.S.

(15) “New facility” means a facility that has not been occupied nor issued a building permit prior to the effective date of this edition of this rule chapter.

(16) “NFPA 1” means the National Fire Protection Association Code 1, entitled the “Fire Code,” the Florida edition as adopted in rule 69A-3.012, F.A.C.

(17) “NFPA 101” means the National Fire Protection Association Code 101, entitled the “Life Safety Code,” the Florida edition as adopted in rule 69A-3.012, F.A.C.

(18) “Student-occupied space” means any area planned primarily for use by six (6) or more students.

(19) The definitions in Section 1013.01, F.S., of words and terms found in section 1013.12, F.S., or of words or terms found in this rule chapter apply to this rule chapter; however, in the event of a conflict between the definitions in section 1013.01 or 1013.12, F.S., and these rules, the definitions in sections 1013.01 and 1013.12, F.S. shall control.

*Rulemaking Authority 633.104(1), (7), 1013.12(1) FS. Law Implemented 633.104(7), 633.206, 633.208, 1013.12, 1013.371, 1013.38 FS. History–New 2-18-03, Formerly 4A-58.003, Amended 11-26-06, 11-4-12.*

**69A-58.0031 New Construction of Educational Facilities.**

(1) New construction and new buildings are subject to and controlled by NFPA 1, the  edition as adopted in rule 69A-3.012, F.A.C., in Chapter 20.2, relating to “Educational Occupancies” and NFPA 101, the edition as adopted in rule 69A-3.012, F.A.C., Chapter 14, “New Educational Occupancies,” except where specifically otherwise provided in this rule chapter. 

(2) Notwithstanding any rule or adopted code or standard in conflict herewith, the following procedures apply with respect to new construction and new buildings.

(a) Prior to commencement of any new construction or remodeling:

1\. The board shall submit for review at least one copy of the site plan for each new facility and each new facility addition exceeding 2,500 square feet to the local fire official providing fire-protection to the facility in accordance with section 1013.38(1), F.S.

2\. All site plans reviewed by the local fire official shall be reviewed in accordance with section 1013.38(1), F.S.

3\. The board shall approve or cause to be approved the plans, drawings, designs, proposals, blueprints, and other construction or remodeling documents and evaluate the same for complete compliance with the Florida Fire Prevention Code.

4\. In addition to the site plans submitted, the board may show compliance with all applicable firesafety codes and standards by at least one (1) of the means provided in sections 1013.38(2)(a) through (d), F.S. 

(b) The method of compliance must be documented and maintained as part of the construction records file. 

(c) Upon request by the local fire official, the board shall provide reasonable access to all construction documents and provide in writing to the local fire official the method(s) employed to achieve compliance with the Florida Fire Prevention Code.

(3) The board must show compliance with all applicable firesafety codes and standards by contracting with a firesafety inspector certified under section 633.216, F.S.

(4) A certificate of occupancy shall not be issued until the board’s certified building official has determined that the building or structure and its site conditions comply with all applicable statutes, these rules, and all applicable firesafety codes and standards.

(5) Horizontal exits referenced in NFPA 101, section 14.2.2.5 and exit passageways referenced in NFPA 101, section 14.2.2.7 are prohibited.

*Rulemaking Authority 633.104(1), (7), 1013.12 FS. Law Implemented 633.104(7), 633.206, 633.208, 1013.12, 1013.371, 1013.38 FS. History–New 11-26-06, Amended 11-4-12.*

**69A-58.004 Firesafety Inspections.**

(1) There shall be one (1) required annual inspection of existing educational facilities, ancillary plants, and auxiliary facilities, as follows:

(a) Pursuant to section 1013.12(2)(c), F.S., a firesafety inspection of each building of each educational plant and each ancillary plant shall be made annually by the board.

(b) Pursuant to section 1013.12(3)(b), F.S., a firesafety inspection of each building of each educational plant and each ancillary plant may be made annually by the local fire official.

(2) The inspections paragraphs (1)(a) and (b):

(a) Are applicable to all buildings owned, leased, or being lease-purchased by the board, including all permanent and relocatable buildings;

(b) Shall begin not sooner than one (1) year after a new building has been occupied;

(c) Shall be performed in accordance with any applicable firesafety code or standard, such as NFPA 101, the edition as adopted in rule 69A-3.012, F.A.C., or any other applicable code or standard which has been adopted in this rule chapter; and,

(d) Are permitted and encouraged to be conducted jointly by the board fire official and the local fire official and documented on one (1) inspection form. If the inspection is performed jointly, the inspection form shall clearly identify the name and certification number of each inspector and his or her employer. Each inspector must sign the inspection report.

(3) Reports of the inspections in subsection (1) shall be filed with the local school board and the local site administrator.

(4) A plan and schedule for correction of any deficiency in the inspection report shall be developed by any firesafety inspector finding a deficiency in conjunction with the board and shall be adopted and complied with by the board.

(5) Each inspection report and plan of correction shall contain, at a minimum, the following information:

(a) The name of the school district or public college;

(b) The name of the board fire official and the local fire official (i.e., municipality, county, or independent special fire control district);

(c) The name of the facility inspected;

(d) The type of facility inspected; 

(e) The facility address;

(f) The number of the facility as listed in the florida inventory of school houses (FISH #);

(g) The name, address, and phone number of each inspector, and the designation of whether such inspector is a board fire official or local fire official;

(h) The date of the inspection;

(i) A report of each deficiency noted during the inspection. Each deficiency report shall contain:

1\. The building name or number and, if applicable, the FISH number of the building and room in which the violation was noted;

2\. A description of the violation or deficiency and the specific code citation for the violation or deficiency;

3\. The number of times this violation or deficiency has been cited, if applicable;

4\. The estimated correction date;

5\. The total number of violations or deficiencies cited not involving serious life safety hazards;

6\. The total number of violations or deficiencies cited involving serious life safety hazards;

7\. The date of the scheduled reinspection;

8\. A statement that the district or board has or has not complied with section 1013.12(2)(c), F.S., as applicable; 

9\. A statement that the county, municipality, or independent special fire control district having firesafety responsibilities has or has not complied with section 1013.12(3)(b), F.S., as applicable;

10\. Verification that the required fire drills have been completed; and,

11\. The signature of the firesafety inspector or inspectors conducting the inspection.

(6) The inspection required by subsection (1), shall be certified to the division by June 30 of each year.

(a) The board conducting a fire safety inspection under paragraph (1)(a), shall certify to the division that the inspection has been completed by electronically entering the required information regarding the inspection into the “School Inspection Reporting System” database and retain the original or a copy thereof.

(b) The local fire official conducting a firesafety inspection under paragraph (1)(b), shall certify to the division that the inspection has been completed by electronically entering the required information regarding the inspection into the “School Inspection Reporting System” database and retain the original or copy thereof.

(c) The inspection report resulting from a joint inspection shall be certified by the board.

(d) The board shall maintain with each yearly inspection report a list of corrected deficiencies from the prior fiscal year report.

(7) Any firesafety inspector certified in accordance with section 633.216, F.S., or other designated employee authorized by a unit of government may access the “School Inspection Reporting System” via the internet at http://sfm.bebr.ufl.edu/. Inspection authorities and the public may access the “School Inspection Reporting System” through the Division’s website located at www.myfloridacfo.com/SFM/.

*Rulemaking Authority 633.104(1), (7), 633.206, 1013.12(1) FS. Law Implemented 633.104(7), 633.206, 633.208, 1013.12, 1013.371, 1013.38 FS. History–New 2-18-03, Formerly 4A-58.004, Amended 11-26-06, 5-18-08, 11-4-12.*

**69A-58.0041 Charter Schools.**

(1) All authorized charter schools located on property that is owned or leased by a school district or a public college shall be inspected in accordance with section 1013.12(2)(c), F.S., and the provisions of this rule chapter.

(2) All other authorized charter schools shall be inspected by the local fire official providing emergency services to the charter school in accordance with section 1013.12(5)(b), F.S., and the provisions of this rule chapter.

(3) Inspections of charter schools shall be certified to the division using the same procedure as all other public schools and colleges in accordance with subsection 69A-58.004(6), F.A.C.

*Rulemaking Authority 633.104(1), (7), 1013.12(1) FS. Law Implemented 663.104(7), 633.206, 633.208, 1013.12, 1013.371, 1013.38 FS. History–New 11-4-12.*

**69A-58.005 Serious Life Safety Hazards.**

(1) Serious life safety hazards as set forth in section 1013.12, F.S., and in paragraph (2)(b), below, require prompt corrective action by the board or withdrawal of the educational or ancillary plants or affected portions thereof from use until corrected.

(2)(a) Serious life safety hazards include:

1\. A non-functional fire alarm system. A non-functional fire alarm system is one impaired to the extent that a significant portion is not in operation and the system is incapable of functioning as it was designed.

2\. A non-functional fire sprinkler system. A non-functional fire sprinkler system occurs any time a significant portion of any one (1) zone is impaired to the extent that the sprinkler system is incapable of automatic activation within the protected space or when any system component lacks an adequate water supply.

3\. A door with a padlock or other lock or device which precludes egress at any time;

4\. An inadequate exit;

5\. A hazardous electrical system condition;

6\. Potential structural failure;

7\. Storage conditions that create a fire hazard.

(b) Other conditions may be identified to the division by the board fire official or local fire official for designation as a serious life safety hazard, including but not limited to:

1\. The placement of a functional smoke and heat detector in a manner not consistent with NFPA 72, the edition as adopted in rule 69A-3.012, F.A.C.;

2\. An inaccessible or expired fire extinguisher; and,

3\. A door required to be self-closing with a doorstop, wedge, or other device or object holding it open.

(c) The criteria to be used by the division to determine whether such other condition shall be designated as a serious life safety hazard shall be either:

1\. Those conditions located in subdivision 6.2, NFPA 101, the edition as adopted in rule 69A-3.012, F.A.C., to wit:

a. The relative danger of the start and spread of fire;

b. The danger of smoke or gases generated; and,

c. The danger of explosion or other occurrence potentially endangering the life and safety of any occupant of the building or structure.

2\. Hazard of contents shall be determined by the board fire official or local fire official on the basis of the character of the contents and the processes or operations conducted in the building or structure. For the purposes of these rules, where different degrees or hazard of contents exists in different parts of a building or structure, the most hazardous shall govern the classification unless hazardous areas are separated or protected as specified in section 8.4 and the applicable sections of Chapters 11 through 42 of NFPA 101, the edition as adopted in rule 69A-3.012, F.A.C.; or

3\. Upon a finding of a dangerous condition consistent with the criteria located in NFPA 1, section 3.3.39.1, the edition as adopted in rule 69A-3.012, F.A.C., for extra high hazard occupancies, based on the total amount of Class A combustibles and Class B flammables present, in storage, production, use, finished product, or combination thereof, and when such material is over and above those expected in occupancies classed as ordinary (moderate) hazard. Those areas or occupancies could consist of woodworking, vehicle repair, cooking areas, product displays, and storage and manufacturing processes such as painting and coating, including flammable liquid handling. Also included is warehousing of or in-process storage of other than Class I and Class II commodities as defined by NFPA 13, Standard for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems, section 5.6.3, the edition as adopted in rule 69A-3.012, F.A.C.

*Rulemaking Authority 633.104(1), (7), 1013.12(1), (8) FS. Law Implemented 633.104(7), 633.206, 633.208, 1013.12, 1013.371, 1013.38 FS. History–New 2-18-03, Formerly 4A-58.005, Amended 11-26-06, 11-4-12.*

**69A-58.006 Vacant and Abandoned Buildings.**

Board buildings no longer in use and abandoned shall be free of combustible waste and secured in such a manner as to prevent firesafety hazards and unauthorized or unlawful entry.

*Rulemaking Authority 633.104(1), (7), 1013.12(1) FS. Law Implemented 633.104(7), 633.206, 633.208, 1013.12, 1013.371, 1013.38 FS. History–New 2-18-03, Formerly 4A-58.006, Amended 11-26-06.*

**69A-58.007 Counties, Municipalities, and Independent Special Fire Control Districts Having Firesafety Responsibilities, Without Firesafety Inspectors.**

(1) Any county, municipality, or independent special fire control district having firesafety responsibilities which does not employ or has not contracted with a firesafety inspector certified under section 633.216(1), F.S., to enforce the Florida Fire Prevention Code as required by section 633.208(2), F.S., at the time of the adoption of this rule chapter is permitted to contact the division and request that the division perform the inspections required by the local fire official pursuant to section 1013.12(3), F.S., and this rule chapter and performed under section 633.216(1), F.S.

(2) Upon receiving such request, the division shall perform the inspections required by this rule chapter during the period of time the county, municipality, or independent special fire control district is not in compliance with section 633.216(1), F.S., and does not employ or is not under contract with a firesafety inspector certified under section 633.216(1), F.S., not, however, to exceed one (1) annual inspection per facility.

(3) Each such county, municipality, or independent special fire control district having firesafety enforcement responsibilities shall employ or contract with a firesafety inspector certified under section 633.216(2), F.S., pursuant to the requirement of Section 633.216(1), F.S., to fulfill the obligation imposed by section 633.208, F.S.

(4) No county, municipality, or independent special fire control district having firesafety enforcement responsibilities which employs or contracts with a firesafety inspector as of the effective date of section 1013.12, F.S., is authorized to request that the State Fire Marshal perform the inspections referred to in this section, and the State Fire Marshal shall not perform any inspection for such county, municipality, or independent special fire control district having firesafety responsibilities.

*Rulemaking Authority 633.104(1), (7), 1013.12(1) FS. Law Implemented 633.104(7), 633.206, 633.208, 633.216, 1013.12, 1013.371, 1013.38 FS. History–New 2-18-03, Formerly 4A-58.007, Amended 11-26-06, 11-4-12.*

**69A-58.008 Standards and Requirements for Existing Buildings; Additions to Rule Chapter 69A-60, the Florida Fire Prevention Code.**

(1) Consistent with Section 1013.12, F.S., and this rule chapter, educational facilities are subject to rule chapter 69A-60, F.A.C., the Florida Fire Prevention Code, which incorporates rule chapter 69A-58, F.A.C., by reference.

(2) Fire department access roads. Paved fire department access roads shall not completely encircle an educational plant or portions thereof.

*Rulemaking Authority 633.104(1), (7), 1013.12(1) FS. Law Implemented 633.104(7), 633.206, 633.208, 1013.12, 1013.371, 1013.38 FS. History–New 2-18-03, Formerly 4A-58.008, Amended 11-26-06, 4-12-15.*
# [**69A-58.0081](https://www.flrules.org/gateway/ruleNo.asp?id=69A-58.0081) **Means of Egress.**
(1) Doors.

(a) All doors in fire rated or smoke proof corridors shall be self-closing doors.

(b) Opposite swinging smoke stop doors in smoke partitions within the corridor shall comply with the requirements of section 8.4.3 of the edition of NFPA 101, as adopted in rule 69A-3.012, F.A.C.

(c) Darkroom doors.

1\. In darkrooms with a capacity of 10 or more persons, a revolving darkroom door, if used, shall:

a. Have a pop-out safety feature; and,

b. Be equipped with a remotely located side-hinged door for secondary egress.

2\. In darkrooms with a capacity of fewer than 10 people, a revolving darkroom door with a pop-out safety feature is permitted to be used as the primary means of egress.

3\. Revolving darkroom doors with a pop-out safety feature shall be conspicuously labeled.

4\. In buildings designed on or after October 18, 1994, the requirements of this section apply to darkrooms with an occupancy of 6 or more.

(d) Exit doors shall swing in the direction of exit travel.

(e) All egress doors and gates, regardless of use or location serving spaces designed to be occupied by 6 or more students, shall swing in the direction of exit travel.

(2) Existing smoke stop doors shall meet the requirements of subdivision 8.3.4 of NFPA 101, the edition as adopted in rule 69A-3.012, F.A.C.

(a) Smoke stop doors may be used to create a secondary means of egress from interior instructional spaces.

(b) When a pair of smoke stop doors is located within a corridor, each leaf shall be designed to swing in a direction opposite from the other and each leaf in the pair of doors shall swing in a right-hand direction.

(c) Door stops shall be provided at the head and sides of smoke stop door frames.

(d) Smoke stop door frames shall be free of center mullions.

(e) Smoke stop doors shall be free of locking devices and may be held in the open position only in accordance with section 7.2.1.8 of NFPA 101.

(3) Special Function Doors.

(a) Special function doors such as revolving doors, power operated doors, or horizontal sliding doors shall not be used as a means of egress.

(b) Revolving doors shall have a side-hinged exit door within 10 feet and within the same wall.

(c) Turnstiles shall comply with subdivision 7.2.1.11 of NFPA 101, the edition as adopted in rule 69A-3.012, F.A.C.

(4) Folding Doors and Folding Partitions. Where permanently mounted folding or movable partitions are used to divide a room into smaller spaces capable of being occupied by 6 or more persons, a separate exit from each space or a permanent full height 5' foot wide opening between the spaces shall be provided. This requirement applies to spaces occupied by 10 or more persons in buildings occupied prior to October 18, 1994.

(5) Gates used to secure buildings or used for egress shall be side-hinged and shall allow egress at all times without assistance from the side from which egress is to be made.

(6) Screen and storm doors on exits shall be hinged on the same side as the exit door and swing in the direction of exit travel.

(7) Doors and gates shall be equipped with hardware which allows egress at all times.

(8) All fire-rated doors and solid core doors in partitions rated at 1/2 hour or more, or installed in smoketight partitions, shall be self-closing.

(9) Emergency Rescue (Escape) Openings (Secondary Means of Egress).

(a) In existing non-sprinklered buildings, every instructional space, and other spaces normally subject to student occupancy of 10 or more, shall have at least one (1) window, panel, or door leading to the exterior or to a separate atmosphere.

(b) For buildings designed after October 18, 1994, the emergency rescue (escape) opening shall be provided in rooms over 250 square feet used for classroom or other educational purposes or normally subject to student occupancy of 6 or more.

(c) Windows and panels shall be operable from the inside by a single operation and without the use of tools.

(d) A security screen or grill installed on a window or panel shall be operable from the inside by the same single operation as the window or panel and without the use of tools. The release device shall be readily identifiable and accessible.

(10) Interior instructional spaces shall be provided with side-hinged or double acting communicating doors providing secondary means of egress and emergency rescue (escape). The door shall provide direct access to:

(a) A separated exit corridor;

(b) A separate atmosphere;

(c) At least one enclosed exit stair; or

(d) Another classroom which has a minimum of two doors that open to separate atmospheres.

(11) Specialties and Signage.

(a) Emergency rescue openings shall be marked with a sign that reads: “EMERGENCY RESCUE – KEEP AREA CLEAR.”

(b) Secondary means of egress and emergency escape openings shall be marked with a sign that reads: “EMERGENCY ESCAPE” or “EMERGENCY EGRESS – KEEP AREA CLEAR.”

(c) Where manual pull stations are located inside student-occupied spaces, a permanently affixed sign reading “FIRE ALARM PULL STATION INSIDE” shall be placed outside that space and adjacent to the door. The door to the occupied space shall be unlocked at all times the facility is occupied.

(d) A graphic diagram of primary and secondary evacuation routes shall be posted adjacent to the primary exit door from each student-occupied space. The diagram shall clearly indicate, by contrasting color and number, the primary and secondary route of evacuation.

Exception: When an exit door from a self-contained classroom opens directly to the exterior.

(12) Open Plan Schools.

(a) Each space designed to be occupied by 50 persons or more shall have 2 or more means of egress.

(b) Open plan assembly areas shall have exits leading directly to the exterior and shall be separated from other required exits of the open plan.

(13) Maximum travel distances.

(a) Exits shall be maintained so that the maximum length of travel from any point in the building or space (including places of assembly) to an exit shall not exceed 150' feet.

(b) In a building equipped with a fully automatic fire sprinkler system, the travel distance to an exit may be increased to 200 feet.

(c) Open mezzanines shall be permitted to exit to the exterior from within the space below.

(14) Corridors and hallways.

(a) Corridors shall be arranged so that each end leads to an exit and shall be without pockets or dead ends more than 20' feet in length.

(b) Hallway widths in office and service areas shall be a minimum of 44'' inches in width.

(c) Child Care. Areas designated for children’s sleeping mats, cots, or cribs shall include a clearly marked exit passageway.

(15) Interior Stairs, Exterior Stairs, and Smoke-Proof Towers.

(a) The minimum clear width of stairways serving as a required means of egress for student occupied areas shall be 44'' inches.

(b) All interior stairways shall open directly to the exterior, into a protected vestibule or into a protected corridor that opens to the exterior.

(c) The areas above or below exit stairs and ramps, whether interior or exterior, shall not be used as a closet for storage of any kind, or for any other purpose.

(d) Interior corridors or stairwells shall be free of piping systems designed for flammable liquids or gases.

(16) Kilns.

(a) Kiln rooms and areas shall be provided with adequate exhaust to dispel emitted heat to the exterior.

(b) Kilns shall be located away from paths of egress or exits.

(c) Kilns shall be located in separate rooms when serving students through grade three.

(d) Kiln rooms shall be provided with automatic heat or smoke detection devices appropriate for the environment.

(17) Boiler Rooms.

(a) Boilers shall comply with chapter 554, F.S., and rule chapter 69A-51, F.A.C. A valid boiler inspection certificate of compliance issued by the State Fire Marshal shall be displayed and clearly visible, when required.

(b) Each boiler room door shall:

1\. Open directly to the outside and, if opening toward a building or path of egress, shall have opening protection in accordance with section 8.3.4 of NFPA 101; or

2\. When a door opens into the interior of the building, the door shall swing into the boiler room and have opening protection in accordance with section 8.3.4 of NFPA 101.

(c) All rooms housing a fuel-fired heat producing appliance that does not meet the minimum thresholds of rule chapter 69A-51, F.A.C., and with an input capacity of 60,000 BRUs per hour or more, and that is intended to supply hot water or steam, shall be equipped with heat detectors connected to any required fire alarm system. Access room doors shall have opening protection in accordance with section 8.3.4 of NFPA 101.

(18) Shade Houses or Green Houses.

(a) A minimum of two remotely located side hinged doors that swing in the direction of egress shall be provided from each shade or green house.

(b) Fire alarm pull stations shall be located within 200' feet of any shade or green house.

(c) Fire alarm horns shall be audible inside the shade or green house.

(19) Stages and Platforms. Stages and platforms, including props and equipment, shall conform to the specific requirements of chapter 13 of NFPA 101, the edition as adopted in rule 69A-3.012, F.A.C.

(20) Electrical. Emergency lighting shall be provided in all student-occupied areas and group toilets.

*Rulemaking Authority 633.104(1), (7), 633.206, 1013.12(1) FS. Law Implemented 633.104(7), 633.206, 633.208, 1013.12, 1013.371, 1013.38 FS. History–New 11-26-06, Amended 5-18-08.*

**69A-58.0082 Relocatable Buildings.**

(1) Relocatable buildings: Relocatable buildings sited after March 1, 2002 shall be separated as required by the Florida Building Code.

(a) Relocatable buildings shall be located to allow access by emergency vehicles to at least one (1) elevation of each building as approved by the local fire fighting authority that services the site in accordance with chapter 18 of NFPA 1.

(b) Relocatable buildings sited within a cluster in accordance with this rule are permitted to achieve emergency vehicle access by providing vehicular access to within 200 feet of the entrance of the most remote relocatable unit and shall be provided with an independent fire alarm system with a manual pull station within 100 feet of each egress door. 

Exception: When required by the board, a cluster shall be protected by a fire zone extended from the main educational facility’s fire alarm control panel.

In addition, all of the following requirements shall be met:

1\. The minimum overhead open space within the perimeter of the cluster shall be fifty percent (50%) of the maximum conditioned gross area of the relocatable units within the cluster.

2\. The minimum separation between individual units shall be as approved by the building official in accordance with chapter 553, part IV, F.S., the “Florida Building Code.”

3\. The nearest permanent building or cluster shall be a minimum of (60') sixty feet.

4\. Any unprotected opening between adjacent wall spaces shall be as approved by the building official in accordance with chapter 533, part IV, F.S., the “Florida Building Code.”

5\. The minimum setback for non-combustible relocatable buildings shall be as permitted by local zoning requirements.

(2) Egress doors in relocatable buildings shall be provided as follows:

(a) Classroom units of combustible construction shall have two (2) remotely located doors opening directly to the outside.

(b) Multi-classroom units of non-combustible construction shall have a primary exit door opening directly to the exterior or, if served by interior corridors, shall have a primary exit door and an emergency rescue opening in each space designed to be occupied by six (6) or more students.

1\. This requirement applies to spaces occupied by ten (10) or more persons for buildings designed prior to October 18, 1994.

2\. An emergency rescue opening is not required when a door opens directly to the outside.

(3) Fire Alarm Systems.

(a) In combustible construction, heat or smoke detectors connected to the building’s fire alarm system shall be installed in every classroom, unsupervised space, storage space, and custodial closet.

(b) In non-combustible construction, heat or smoke detectors connected to the building’s fire alarm system shall be installed in each custodial closet.

(c) Relocatable buildings sited a minimum of sixty feet (60') from another relocatable building and a minimum of sixty feet (60') from any permanent building may be served by an independent fire alarm system.

(d) Drill switches shall not be permitted except where a computerized fire alarm system is specifically listed for this purpose.

*Rulemaking Authority 633.104(1), (7), 633.206, 1013.12(1) FS. Law Implemented 633.104(7), 633.206, 633.208, 1013.12, 1013.371, 1013.38 FS. History–New 11-26-06.*

**69A-58.0083 Protection from Hazards.**

(1) Interior vertical openings such as stairways, elevator shafts, light and ventilation shafts, and all service chutes between floors shall be enclosed or protected to prevent the spread of fire and smoke, and shall be maintained in their original fire and smoke-tight condition.

(2) Draftstopping. Any concealed space, such as a utility chase, attic, crawl space, or other vertical or horizontal opening between floors in which combustible material is exposed shall either be:

(a) Provided with draftstopping and automatic heat detection; or

(b) Provided with automatic fire sprinklers.

(3) Fire extinguishers. Fire extinguishers may be located inside student-occupied spaces only when:

(a) The fire extinguisher is located adjacent to the primary exit door;

(b) The door remains unlocked when the facility is occupied; and,

(c) There is posted a permanently affixed sign reading “FIRE EXTINGUISHER INSIDE.”

Exception: Exterior signage is not required when a fire extinguisher is installed inside of every relocatable building on a school or ancillary site.

(4) Existing on-site incinerators and waste burners shall be equipped with a wire screen stack guard and shall be used for burning Class A materials only.

(5) All existing buildings more than four (4) stories or forty-five feet (45') in height shall be equipped with automatic fire sprinkler systems.

(6) Residential Appliances. Residential style ranges installed in home economics instructional spaces, classrooms, faculty lounges, and similar areas shall not be required to comply with the provisions for commercial cooking appliances under NFPA 96, provided all of the following requirements are met:

(a) The space contains only residential-type ranges with hoods vented to the outside.

(b) Fire extinguishers are installed in accordance with NFPA 10.

(c) The space containing the residential style range is not classified as an assembly.

(7) These requirements place no limitations on the use of other residential-type appliances within the space.

*Rulemaking Authority 633.104(1), (7), 1013.12(1) FS. Law Implemented 633.104(7), 633.206, 633.208, 1013.12, 1013.371, 1013.38 FS. History–New 11-26-06, Amended 11-4-12.*

**69A-58.0084 Seclusion Time-Out Rooms.**

(1) Egress. Secured seclusion time-out rooms, when provided, shall be equipped with doors which allow egress at all times in the event of an emergency.

(2) Locking devices.

(a) Locking devices on secured seclusion time-out rooms are permitted only when such room is in full compliance with the criteria in this rule.

(b) An electro-magnetic locking device is the only approved device to secure a secured seclusion time-out room. The lock shall remain engaged only when the human hand is in contact with it placing pressure on it.

1\. Upon release of pressure, the door shall unlock. The locking device shall be designed, and shall be operated, so that it cannot be engaged by leverage of an inanimate object or in any manner except by constant human contact.

2\. The push button shall be recessed from the face of the unit housing, or in some other way designed to prevent taping or wedging the button in the engaged mode.

3\. The device shall have an interface with the fire alarm system and shall automatically release and disengage upon activation of the fire alarm. The locking device shall automatically release and disengage in the event of power failure.

4\. A timer shall not be used on the locking device.

(3) Door Requirements. The door shall have only a push panel exposed on the interior of the room. A vision panel shall be provided in the door, and it shall be no larger than 12'' x 12'' (144'' square inches). The view panel shall consist of clear one-quarter inch (1/4") thick unbreakable plastic panel, flush with the face of the door on the inside. The view panel shall be positioned in the door to allow a staff member to continuously keep the student under observation. The view panel shall not be covered with any material.

(4) Finishes and materials. The ceiling, floor, and walls must be free of any loose, torn or potentially hazardous materials. All surfaces must be kept smooth and free of any hooks, outlets, switches or similar items. Construction materials shall meet all applicable provisions of the Florida Fire Prevention Code and the Florida Building Code. Each secured seclusion time-out room must be identified with a permanently mounted room number.

(5) All secured seclusion time-out rooms must have natural or mechanical ventilation.

(6) The division and the local fire official are permitted to conduct unannounced inspections of all secured seclusion time-out rooms to ensure compliance with this rule chapter. A written record of each inspection must be made and a copy of same must be provided to the school administrator or designee.

(7) During each unannounced inspection, the division or the local fire official is permitted to inspect secured seclusion time-out rooms, interview staff, and review staff development activities to ensure compliance with this rule chapter.

(8) If during any firesafety inspection a secured seclusion time-out room is found in violation of this rule chapter, the board fire official or the local fire official shall immediately report the deficiency to the division in accordance with sections 1013.12(2)(d) or 1013.12(7), F.S., and the secured seclusion time-out room shall be immediately withdrawn from use.

*Rulemaking Authority 633.104(1), (7), 1013.12(1) FS. Law Implemented 633.104(7), 633.206, 633.208, 1013.12, 1013.371, 1013.38 FS. History–New 11-26-06, Amended 11-4-12.*

**69A-58.009 Florida Firesafety School Evaluation System.**

(1) Any Florida school building which was initially occupied prior to January 1, 1985, is permitted to use the Florida Firesafety School Evaluation System originally dated September 19, 2000, and Amended June 28, 2001, which is located in Form DFS-K3-1456 <http://www.flrules.org/Gateway/reference.asp?No=Ref-01845>, (Rev 10-02) and which is hereby incorporated by reference, in lieu of or as an alternative to the requirements of rule 69A-58.008, F.A.C.

(2) The Florida Firesafety School Evaluation System, Form DFS-K3-1456 <http://www.flrules.org/Gateway/reference.asp?No=Ref-01845>, may be obtained by writing to the Division of State Fire Marshal, Bureau of Fire Prevention, 200 East Gaines Street, Tallahassee, Florida 32399-0342.

(3) The Florida Firesafety School Evaluation System must be authorized by the local fire official prior to the implementation of any of its alternative code provisions; however, a local fire official is not permitted to prohibit the use of the Florida Firesafety School Evaluation System for any building which was initially occupied prior to January 1, 1985.

(4) For buildings occupied after January 1, 1985, boards, board fire officials and local fire officials may use the equivalency provisions of Section 1.4 of NFPA 101, the edition as adopted in rule 69A-3.021, F.A.C.

*Rulemaking Authority 633.104(1), (7), 1013.12(1) FS. Law Implemented 633.104(7), 633.206, 633.208, 1013.12, 1013.371, 1013.38 FS. History–New 2-18-03, Formerly 4A-58.009, Amended 11-26-06, 11-4-12.*

**69A-58.010 Other Applicable Codes and Standards.** 

*Rulemaking Authority 633.104(1), (7), 1013.12(1) FS. Law Implemented 633.104(7), 633.206, 633.208, 1013.12, 1013.371, 1013.38 FS. History–New 2-18-03, Formerly 4A-58.010, Repealed 4-12-15.*
